An Nam`Vietnam was named An Nam under the Chinese and French dominations
Bac ban cau`Northern hemisphere
Bac dau`The Great Bear
Bac dau boi tinh`Order of the Legion of honour
Bien Hoa`Xem Dong Nai
Binh Dinh`Quy Nhon, provincial capital of Binh Dinh, is 1,065km from Ha Noi on National Highway 1. In the old days, Quy Nhon was called Thi Nai, the name of a beautiful lake inside the city. Bien Quy Nhon (Quy Nhon+Sea) has an annual average temperature of 25.7oC and is suitable for tourism the year round. Hoang Hau Beach is an ideal place for bathing. Quang Trung Museum is dedicated to Nguyen Hue, a national hero of the 18th century. It was built in his native land of Kien My village, Binh Thanh commune, Tay Son district, some 45km from Quy Nhon City. Nguyen Hue is one of three brothers who led the Tay Son Insurrection. In 1788, he led a great force advancing from Phu Xuan (Hue) to the North. It took 35 days and they exacted an overwhelming defeat on the Qing invaders near Thang Long (now Ha Noi), thereby liberating the royal+capital. He crowned himself Emperor Quang Trung the same year. At Quang Trung Museum, visitors will enjoy music and demonstrations of Vo Tay Son (traditional martial arts of Binh Dinh). In particular, they can+see a young woman, a niece of the 9th generation of Emperor Quang Trung, playing 11 battle drums. In addition, Hoi Van village (Cat Trinh commune, Phu Cat district) is well known for its hot spring. It is composed of+various chemical components useful in the treatment of rheumatism, mental disorder, cardio-vascular diseases and skin diseases. Beside the hot spring, there is a sanatorium which offers steam baths with mineral water of 38oC useful for medical treatment and general health improvement.=Built in 1665 in the Do Ban Citadel - second capital of the Kingdom of Cham Pa some 27km from Quy Nhon City - Thap Thap Pagoda is a Buddhist temple, but its decorations are characterized by the Cham decorative art. Duong Long Cham Tower is also called Thap Nga (Tower of Ivory),+consisting of three towers. This group of towers is one of the most beautiful in Central Vietnam. Banh It Tower is also called Thap Bac (Silver Tower). There, tourists can enjoy a panoramic view of this fertile countryside
Blowing dust and wind`(Gio bui tren duong) The wind and dust blowing on the road#roubled (times).#ard, full of ups and downs
Cao Bang`Cao Bang is a mountainous province in North-Vietnam. Its provincial capital is under the same name. It shares a border of 314km with China to the north and the east, and is inhabited by many ethnic groups. Some 60km from the provincial capital is Pac Bo, a small hamlet in Truong Ha commune, Ha Quang district, close to the Vietnamese-Chinese border. In the local dialect, Pac Bo means watershed, where springs of clear water run. From Thai Nguyen City, provincial capital of Bac Thai province, you drive along Highway 3 to the towns of Bac Can and Phu Thong. After another 16km, you will arrive at Ba Be Lake which is about 225km from Ha Noi. The lake actually consists of three lakes called Pe Lam, Pe Lu and Pe Leng, so it is called Ba Be (Three Seas). Ba Be Lake is surrounded by limestone mountains and thick forests, home to many species of rare birds and animals
Cham`dan toc Cham#With about 100,000 inhabitants, Cham (Cham, Chiem, Hoi) ethnic group originates from Ancient Cham Pa Kingdom. They live mainly in Ninh Thuan, Binh Thuan, Binh Dinh, Phu Yen. Belonging to Ma Lai-Da Dao linguistic group, the Cham people remains influenced by matriarchy and Indian culture. The ancient Cham writing is Sanskrit-based. Hinduism+and Mohammedanism are their principal religions#THE UNIQUE CHAM CULTURE: The Cham culture is a unique tradition, contributing much to the+diversity and richness of the Vietnamese multi-ethnic culture. From the first century AD, the Cham people received deep influences from Indian culture. In the 7th century AD, Cham Pa was already a kingdom with a capital in Tra Kieu (now Quang Nam) with a temple dedicated to the Indian Valmiki and his famous epic, the Ramayana By the middle of the 8th century AD, their capital was shifted to Nha Trang and five years later to Dong Duong, 15 km away from Tra Kieu in the southeast.#The Cham are one of the 53 ethnic groups in Vietnam and comprise various subgroups. There are around 98,000 Cham people, including the Cham Hroi in Binh Dinh, Phu Yen and those living in Ninh Thuan, Binh Thuan and other parts of southern Vietnam Inhabiting a large area, the Cham also have many diversified customs and social practices. While most of the Cham in Saigon, AnGiang and Tay Ninh, and the Cham from Cambodia follow Islam, those living in Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan provinces follow Brahmanism. Islam is modified to suit the people here and is called 'Bani. The Cham language is of the+Malayo-Polynesian family and is spoken by about 250,000 people (G Moussay, Dictionaire Cham-Vietnamien-Francais, published by Phan Rang Culture Centre 1971). However, it does not necessarily follow that the Cham in different regions can fully understand each other. It is natural that the Cham borrow local words and expressions at the place they reside, mainly from Kho Me and Vietnamese. In terms of their script, only the Cham Dong (in Binh Thuan, Ninh Thuan provinces) have preserved their original script. The Cham script is now being taught at elementary school to help maintain this unique linguistic tradition. The Cham also+utilised the Akhar Thrah scripts from Nam An which has been incorporated into present-day Cham scripts. Ancient texts written on papyrus or paper+used both of these scripts and include various epics and love stories such as the Devamuno Inra Patra, Ummurup, Cambini, Bini-Cam, Sah Pakei, Patauw Kamai, Patauw adat Likei etc. This ancient literature gives a clear picture of the life and society of the Cham through history. Together with academic literature, the Cham also have very rich popular literature+which comprises hundreds of stories, sayings, idioms, puzzles, songs etc., which make up a precious literary tradition. Cham people have songs for+fishing using the 'vai chai' rhythm (pwoc jah), betrothals (danh dom da ra), milling rice (danh rasung chai) etc. These rhythms are also sung during festivities with dances which have become a real attraction to spectators. Surely the greatest and most unique contribution from the Cham culture is their architecture and carvings Historical stupa compounds in My Son (Quang Nam-Da Nang), Thap Ba (Nha Trang), Thap Cham (Ninh Thuan) and various Tara statues in Dong Duong, and Apsaras in Tra Kieu have all had their position+confirmed in the Southeast Asian sculptural tradition.+Though most of these works were created for religious purposes and stemmed from Brahmin spiritualism, they became popularised and part of the Cham+national culture. As such, the Indian-inspired Vishnus, and Shivas went through considerable transformations and became more human when recreated by Cham artisans.=In the present day, the Cham people have adjusted their lives to local conditions. People in Tay Ninh mostly work in agriculture, fishing and+commerce while those who live near Saigon have developed an urban lifestyle. The majority, however, still maintain traditional professions like cultivation, husbandry, weaving and ceramic production. Cham+handicrafts are now exported to various countries where they are highly appreciated due to their unique style and high quality workmanship
Chu Van An`Chu Van An (1292-1370) - talented and virtuous pedagogue and scholar in the Tran times - was reputed for straightforwardness and not being concerned with fame and advantages. His native village was in Thanh Dam (Thanh Tri- Ha Noi). He graduated as doctor and came home to teach instead of becoming a mandarin. Many of his students make their way in the world (Pham Su Manh, Le Quat). Chu Van An taught the crown prince at Quoc Tu Giam, and submitted That Tram So (petition asking to behead seven sycophantic mandarins) to the king. Because the king's disapproval, he resigned and led a secluded life under the pen-name Tieu An (secluded woodcutter). His works were Quoc Ngu Thi Tap (Anthology of national language), Tieu An Thi Tap (Anthology of a secluded woodcutter). There is a temple to his memory at the Temple of Literature in Ha Noi#CHU VAN AN: LIFE AND TIMES. Chu Van An died over six centuries ago, in the year 1370, but the example he set as a great patriot and teacher will remain engraved in the hearts of our people. Having won the degree of Thai Hoc Sinh (doctorate) in the official literary examinations, he refused to be appointed a mandarin official at the royal court and instead opened a school to train the country's scholars. Many of his more talented students would later go on to pursue successful careers. Two of his students, Pham Su Manh and Le Quat, rose to the position of prime minister. In the reign of Tran Minh Ton, Chu Van An was invited to teach at Quoc Tu Giam, the National University in the capital city of Thang Long (now Ha Noi), attended by the most talented scholars as well as the sons of high dignitaries, including the prince heir to the throne. He was the author of many books: Collections of poems in both the vernacular and classical Chinese, dissertations on Confucian classics, and a treaty on traditional medicine The vestiges of his life and career, carefully preserved by the people in spite of the ravages of war and the passage of time, testify to the great respect in which his memory is held. Thanh Liet commune in Thanh Tri district south of Ha Noi is believed to be the birth place of his mother, Le Thi Chiem. In the communal house are kept a record of his life and a couplet praising his virtues and achievements. A shrine was also built in 1846, dedicated to him and to a remarkable man among his descendants, Doctor Chu Dinh Bang, who lived in the reign of Le Thanh Ton (15th century) In Tam Hiep commune, Thanh Tri district is found Huynh Cung Temple, built on the site of a famous school founded by Chu Van An. In Van Dien south of Ha Noi is a stone stele with an inscription honouring Chu Van An, erected in 1803. But the most important national institutions related to his life and career are the Temple of Literature (Van Mieu) and the National University (Quoc Tu Giam) in Ha Noi. Here the Tran kings erected an altar to honour him alongside those dedicated to Confucius and his 72 disciples. Also in Ha Noi, a tree-lined street and a secondary school, the most renowned in the country, are named after him. In Hai Hung province are found vestiges related to the later years of his life. Here he lived as a recluse for ten years after unsuccessfully petitioning the king for the death sentence to seven corrupt high-ranking dignitaries. The commune where he spent those years is now named after him. It is located in Chi Linh district near a beautiful range of hills called Phuong Son (Phoenix Mount). His remains were buried there
Da Lat`Xem Lam Dong
Da Nang`Xem Quang Nam-Da Nang
Dao`dan toc Dao#ith more than 400,000 inhabitants, Dao ethnic group occupies 0.65% of the
Dong Do`Ancient name of Ha Noi
Duy Tan`King Duy Tan (ruler from 1907 to 1916) whose name at birth was Vinh San was considered the mastermind behind the patriotic armed insurrection led by Thai Phien, Tran Cao Van and many other patriots. The insurrection, however, was soon discovered and crushed and all participants were killed. Only King Duy Tan was exiled to the Reunion island in the Indian Ocean. The king was released from jail only to be dragged into a re-invasion scheme of Vietnam after the World War II. He was fired at in a suspicious air-crack in Middle-Africa on Christmas day of 1945 as his "Absolute Independence policy" was not in line with the colonial aspirations of General De Gaulle. Unfortunately, the patriotic king was misunderstood by most Vietnamese people due to his unclear relation with General De Gaulle. By the 1960s, Vietnamese and French researchers brought to light the relation between king Duy Tan and General De Gaulle, proving the unchanging patriotic will of the king. In 942, from the jail island Reunion, listening for the first time to the anti-fascism appeal of General De Gaulle broadcast from Britain, king Duy Tan showed a deep respect and admiration for him. He then founded a war-resistant group operating for the ally- France. With a self-made radio, he recorded and transmitted information to the French Liberation Force against the pro-Germany government at VichyWhen Reunion island was liberated by the French Liberation Force, he voluntarily enrolled as a Radio maitre aboard the ship Leopard. In March 1945, France was liberated. By the end of the year, subsequent to the abdication of king Bao Dai in Vietnam, De Gaulle arranged for 100 parachute commandos in Sai Gon to prepare for the setting up of a dynasty headed by king Duy Tan.But Vinh San (king Duy Tan) knew nothing about this secret scheme. He vigorously believed that the French hero De Gaulle would help him bring peace, re-unification, and complete independence to his home country, Vietnam.+Additionally, he was opposed to the plan of ascending the throne . His political viewpoint was sharply contested and led him to become pessimistic. On December 17, 1945, he predicted his death to his friend and immediately wrote a political statement to express his belief in struggling for the unification of the north, centre and the south of Vietnam. As predicted, the event of his death took place eight days later His statement was veiled in secrecy until 1947 when the Combat newspaper copied and ran it. This delay in publicizing the facts surrounding his death and the nature of his true intentions for planning for a unified Vietnam made him misunderstood by the people of Vietnam. In reality, this patriot deserves the respect of all the peopleIn April 1987, thanks to the joint assistance of the governments of Vietnam and France, the king's remains were moved by his relatives to Vietnam and set down next to the royal mausoleums of King Duc Duc (his grandfather) and King Thanh Thai (his father) in the central city of Hue 
Gian xuong gian cot`hu gian xuong
Ha Long`Xem Quang Ninh
Ha Noi`Ha Noi is the political capital of Vietnam. Ha Noi lies in Red River Delta and is situated in a tropical area having a strong monsoon influence. The name of Ha Noi (Interior side of a river) has been+derived from an ancient language which is literally known as a land area located in the inner side of Red River. It does not mean that the city is inside the river, but it is embraced by about 100 km of the Red River dykes. Ha Noi has four inner precincts (Hoan Kiem, Ba Dinh, Hai Ba Trung, Dong Da) and five suburban districts (Tu Liem, Thanh Tri, Gia Lam, Dong Anh and Soc Son). From the time when the first State of ancient Vietnam was established, Ha Noi (formerly Thang+Long) has been considered a sacred and typical part of Vietnam. It was in the autumn of 1010 that Ly Cong Oan (also known as Ly Thai To) - the founder of Nha Hau Ly (Post-Ly Dynasty) - removed the court from Hoa Lu (present-day Ninh Binh province) to Dai La Citadel which was later renamed as Thang Long. As soon as the royal fleet with King Ly Thai To aboard cast anchors at the landing wharf in the Nhi River (present-day Red River), there ascended a golden dragon. Thinking that it was a good omen for his trip, King Ly Thai To had Dai La Citadel renamed Thang Long (Ascending Dragon). He also had Hoa Lu - his former capital - renamed Truong Yen. 1397 was the year marking an end to the decline of Nha Hau Le (Post-Le Dynasty). It was the time when the king indulged himself in entertainments. Ho Quy Ly, a high-ranking court+official, overthrew the king and proclaimed himself the king of a new dynasty - Ho Dynasty. This dynasty removed the court to Tay Do (Western Capital) in Thanh Hoa province. Thang Long was then renamed Dong Do (Eastern Capital). In 1407, the Ming aggressors defeated the army of Ho Dynasty. They rushed to Dong Do Citadel and renamed it Dong Quan Citadel. In 1418, a farmer whose name was Le Loi (future Le Thai To) grouped an insurrection army in Lam Son district in Thanh Hoa province. He proclaimed himself as Binh Dinh Vuong (King+of Pacification) and led the resistance against the aggressors for 10 years and regained national independence. He entered the then Dong Quan Citadel and the next year, he renamed the citadel as Dong Kinh (Eastern Imperial City). In 1527, when a new dynasty - Nha Mac (Mac Dynasty) - was in the control of the country, the citadel resumed its former name (Thang Long). In 1802, King Gia Long established the first court of Nha Nguyen (Nguyen Dynasty) in Phu Xuan in the central coastal city of Hue. Thang Long was then used as the regional capital exercising+influence on 11 northern citadels. But the word LONG which literally meant RuNG (Dragon) was changed to 'long' which was understood as 'thinh' (Prosperity). In 1831, King Minh Mang established the province of Ha Noi which includes the ancient Thang Long Citadel and the districts of Tu Liem, ung Hoa, Thuong Tin and Ly Nhan. In 1888, after the tragic defeat of Nha Nguyen (Nguyen Dynasty), Ha Noi became a colonial city until 1954. Ha Noi capital was liberated from French colonialists on October 10, 1954. After April 30, 1975, Ha Noi was+officially recognized as the capital of Vietnam by the communist goverment. In the old days, each of 36 guild streets in Ha Noi had its+name closely associated with the trade and occupation of the inhabitants Now, Ha Noi has 381 streets representing a tenfold increase as compared with the ancient Ha Noi with 36 guild streets only. These are some tourist attractions of Ha Noi#Chua mot cot (One-pillar Pagoda): Its original name was Dien Huu (long-lasting happiness and good luck). Legend has it that King Ly Thai Ton was very old and had no son of his own. Therefore, he often went to pagodas to pray for Buddha's blessing so that he might have a son.+One night, he had a dream that he was granted a private audience with Buddha with a male baby in his hands. Buddha, sitting on a lotus flower in a square-shaped lotus pond in the western side of Thang Long Citadel,+gave the king the baby. Months later, the queen got pregnant and gave birth to a male child. To repay gift from Buddha, the king ordered the construction of a pagoda which was supported by only one pillar resembling a lotus seat on which Buddha had been seated. The pagoda was dedicated to Buddha#Quoc Tu Giam (Temple of Literature) was built in 1070 as a dedication to the founder of Confucianism. Six years later, Quoc Tu Giam - the first university of Vietnam - was built in the premises of Van Mieu. Quoc Tu Giam was the first school for princes and children of royal family members. In 1482, King Le Thanh Ton ordered+the erection of steles with inscription of all the names, birth dates and birth places of doctors and other excellent graduates who took part in examinations since 1442. Each stela is placed on the back of a turtle representing the nation's longevity. During Nha Nguyen (Nguyen Dynasty), Temple of Literature was moved to Phu Xuan (Hue Royal City)#Chua Kim Lien (Kim Lien Pagoda): Legend has it that in the 12th century, Princess Tu Hoa, daughter of King Ly Than Ton, led her ladies-in-waiting to this area. They cultivated mulberry and silkworms to make silk. Later, a pagoda was built right on the site and by 1771, it was named Kim Lien (Golden Lotus)#Chua Quan Su (Quan Su Pagoda) was built in the 17th century. It is located in the street of the same name. Since 1958, Vietnam Buddhism Association has used this pagoda as its head office#Den Quan Thanh (Quan Thanh Temple): The three ancient Chinese characters which are still seen today on the top of the entrance to the temple mean Tran Vu Quan. Literally, the temple is dedicated to Saint Tran Vu Temples are places for worshipping saints while pagodas are dedicated+to Buddha and faithful disciplines. Saint Tran Vu was a legendary figure which was a combination between a legendary character in Vietnam's legend and a mystic character derived from Chinas legend. In Vietnam's legend, he was a saint who had earned the merits of assisting Thuc Phan (future King An Duong Vuong) in getting rid of ghost spirit during the construction of Co Loa Citadel. An Duong Vuong Temple in Co Loa Citadel (Dong Anh district) is also named Thuong Temple. Inside it, there are An Duong Vu+o+ng's bronze statue (cast in 1897) and a big arbalest symbolizing the magic arbalest in the old days. In Chinas+legend, Saint Tran Vu was a saint who had made many contributions in safeguarding the northern border. Quan Thanh Temple was built during the reign of King Ly Thai To (1010-1028). Special attention should be paid to the black bronze statue of Saint Tran Vu Another object of no less+significance is a smaller black bronze statue of Old Trong, a chief artisan of the bronze casting team who had made the giant statue of Saint Tran Vu and the great bell on top of the entrance#Den Hai Ba Trung (Hai Ba Trung Temple) is also called Dong Nhan Temple, because it is located in Dong Nhan village, Hai Ba Trung precinct. Built in 1142 under the reign of King Ly Anh Ton, it is dedicated to the two Vietnamese heroines Trung Trac and Trung Nhi. On+the 5th and 6th days of the lunar second month, there is a grand festival at this temple to commemorate the two national heroines#Ho Tay (West Lake) & Duong Thanh Nien (Youth Road): Youth Road can be compared to a beautiful bridge spanning across the two large bodies of water - West Lake to the northwest and Truc Bach Lake to the southeast. Covering an area of nearly 500 hectares, Ho Tay was also+called Dam Dam (Misty Pond), Lang Bac (White Waves)....Oral tradition has it that Ho Tay derived from a low-lying area upturned by a golden buffalo, so the stream derived from Ho Tay was named Song Kim Nguu (Golden Buffalo River). As for Truc Bach Lake, legend has it that in the old days, Truc Bach Lake was where lived the abandoned ladies-in-waiting who were forced to weave silk. Therefore, beautiful silk was called Truc Bach (Silk of the Truc village). As the biggest lake in the city, Ho Tay is surrounded by many areas reputed for their traditional occupations: Yen Phu and Nghi Tam (silkworm-breeding and silk-weaving villages in the past), Quang Ba, Nhat Tan (peach-growing village), Buoi (paper-making village). In Tay Son times, Nguyen Huy Luong wrote Tung Tay Ho Phu (Eulogy for West Lake) so as to highlight the landscapes of the West Lake and Nguyen Hue (future Quang Trung)'s glorious merits. Now, Ho Tay has been earmarked for the city's major+tourism development center#Ho Hoan Kiem (Lake of Restored Sword): The name of this lake is derived from a legend having it that a fisherman named Le Than caught a sword blade when drawing the fish-net. Than decided to offer it to his commanding general Le Loi (future Le Thai To). Afterwards, Le Loi found a hilt fitting that blade very well. This sword had always+been on his side during 10 years of resistance against Ming aggressors After winning over the foreign aggression, King Le Thai To returned to Thang Long Citadel. One day, aboard a royal boat, he took a cruise in the Luc Thuy lake. Suddenly, a giant turtle emerged and came towards him.+The king withdrew his sword, and pinpointed with the sword the direction of the coming turtle for his soldiers' attention. All of a sudden, the turtle caught the sword between its teeth from the king's hand and submerged. The king thought that during the resistance against Ming aggressors, the genius had offered him this sword to help him defeat the enemy. At that time, the peace was returning, and the genius appeared to take back the sword. Consequently, King Le Thai To decided to name the Luc Thuy lake Ho Hoan Kiem (Lake of Restored Sword). In the middle of the lake is Thap Rua (Turtle Tower). The lake abounds in big turtles+aged five or six hundred. When there are the changes in weather, they often emerge or expose themselves at the foot of the Turtle Temple#Den Ngoc Son (Ngoc Son Temple): Initially, the temple was called Ngoc Son Pagoda. Later, it was renamed as Ngoc Son Temple, because it+was dedicated to the saints. Saint Van Xuong was a person considered the brightest star in Vietnam's literature and intellectual circles. Tran Hung Dao was worshipped because he was the national hero who led the Vietnamese people to a resounding victory over the Mongol aggression. The temple as it is seen today was attributable to the restoration efforts of Nguyen Van Sieu, a great Hanoian writer. He had a large pen-shaped tower (Thap But) built at the entrance to the temple. On the upper section of Thap But, there are three Chinese characters Ta Thanh Thien which mean literally that to write on the blue sky is to imply the height of a genuine and righteous person's determination and will. Behind Thap But is Dai Nghien (Ink Stand). The Ink Stand is carved from stone resembling a peach, which is placed on the back of three frogs on top of the gate to the temple. Passing through Dai Nghien, visitors will tread on the wooden bridge called The Huc. The Huc is literally understood+as the place where beams of morning sunshine are touching#NGHI TAM: A VILLAGE OF FLOWERS? Once upon a time, the King of Nha Hau Ly decided to build a palace for Princess Tu Hoa in a village near Thang Long so that she could spend+her time farming silk cocoons on the large mulberry fields. The village was Nghi Tam, a name now famous throughout the country for the flowers grown here. Nghi Tam flowers in fact add to the beauty of Ho Tay or the West Lake area in present-day Ha Noi. It is said that Nha Hau Ly in Vietnam was not only famous for its glorious victories in defence+of the country against foreign invaders. It paid much attention to the development of agriculture and handicrafts. For long, the village of Tam (or the village of silk cocoons) had been known for its handlooms. The story of this village goes as follows: Initially, there were only three basic kinds of trees grown here, ie the peach, kumquat and chrysanthemum. Peach trees and their spring blossom have brought fame to this village. Originally, the cultivation of peach started in the village of Tam, then spread to Nhat Tan. Young peach trees are carefully tended and allowed to blossom only on the Lunar New Year's Eve. Hanoians take the utmost care in the selection of their New Year branch of peach From the size to the form of the branch and the design of the pot, every tiny detail must be in harmony with the sentiment or philosophy that one wishes to express, in addition to matching with the interior decoration of the house. Kumquat is another species that spread from Tam village to Tay Ho. During tet, most families in Ha Noi, and now throughout the country, have their kumquat trees inside the home. Kumquat is used by Vietnamese to symbolise "talents" and "wealth" for the family White apricot blossoms called "Bach mai" in Vietnamese are yet another scene-stealer in Nghi Tam. The villagers of Nghi Tam consider an apricot blossom as beautiful only when it has six white soft petals on a green calyx. They must resemble the swallow's wings in the spring days. There is also a kind of green apricot which is rare and valuable. Then there is "Song mai" or "Double apricot" since each flower gives two fruits. The apricot branch should be able to incorporate the spirit. After the flowering season, the branch starts to give fruit which are washed and put in a ceramic cask to prepare apricot wine for the following New Year's festival. Narcissus of various kinds are also cultivated in Nghi Tam. The people here know the secret of making these flowers bloom at the required time as on New Year's Eve or on the wedding day etc. Each narcissus pot should have about 20-30 flowers blooming to the right degree to express the virginity of the bride. Along with these species of flowers, Nghi Tam is also known for the chrysanthemum and camelia species it grows. But the concern now is that with the rapid urbanisation of the locality, will it continue to preserve this beautiful tradition?
Ha Tien`Ha Tien is a small town located on the banks of the Giang Thanh river and surrounded on all the sides with mountain ranges. The town is 120 kilometres from Rach Gia (provincial capital of Kien Giang) and 370 kilometres from Saigon. Ha Tien has 10 famous tourist attractions the names of which are mentioned in a piece of poetry named "Ha Tien Thap Vinh". Besides the attraction of swimming in the sea, visitors are likely to be interested in sightseeing. And the most likely place to be is Dong Ho (Dong Lake). The lake is two kilometres wide and about three kilometres long. The vast water surface looks tranquil all the time, due to the shelter offered by the surrounding mountains
Ha Tinh`Ha Tinh is situated 340km from Ha Noi. Dong Loc is the meeting place of the two provincial roads 5 and 15 in the hilly area of Ha Tinh province. During the anti-US war, Dong Loc Forked Road was the main junction of the supply line from the North to Ho Chi Minh Trail. US aircraft concentrated a great number of bombs and ammunitions in repeated efforts to destroy the junction and the surrounding area. This less than 0-km section of road had to undergo 2,057 bombardments. A memorable place is the native village of the great poet Nguyen Du. Nguyen Du was born in 1765 from a family of scholars and illustrious mandarins. Having successfully passed the provincial examinations at the age of nineteen, he served as military mandarin under Le Canh Hung. In 1789, Nguyen Hue (emperor Quang Trung) made a northward advance and drove 290,000 Qing invaders out of the country. King Le Chieu Thong cowardly fled the country and followed the invaders. After the fall of the Le Dynasty, Nguyen Du refused to serve Nguyen Hue. Instead, he chose to live in poverty for 10 years in his wife's native village in Thai Binh province In 1802, Nguyen Du grudgingly accepted service under Gia Long, the founder of Nha Nguyen (Nguyen Dynasty). However, in his heart, he did not like mandarin work and applied for retirement no less than three times, each time in vain. He was named Deputy Minister at the Ministry of Rites. In 1820, he died in the royal capital of Hue. His most famous work is Kieu Story, a narrative in 3,254 verses. With this work, Nguyen Du stands out as the greatest poet Vietnam has ever produced There is a house in commemoration of Nguyen Du in Tien Dien village. About one kilometre from the house is his tomb
Han luat`Han Thuyen's prosody (of the Tran dynasty) (based on the Tang's)
Ho Chi Minh`Legendary leader of the Vietnamese communists in the North, he is virtually unknown to people in the South. Note: Due the conflicting information between the two side, oversea and Vietnam, we decide to postpone this entry
Hoa`dan toc Hoa#In the late 19th century, nearly 500,000 Chinese migrated to Southeast Asia. With 1,000,000 inhabitants, Hoa ethnic group occupies 1.77 % of the Vietnamese population and lives mainly in Cho Lon area of Saigon (HoChiMinh City), Can Tho, Kien Giang, Da Nang, Ha Noi, Hai Phong, Quang Ninh.....Most of them are workers and have been+naturalised in Vietnam. However, many members of Hoa ethnic group are expert in business and held several leading economic branches in South-Vietnam before
Hoa Binh`Located on Highway 6, Hoa Binh provincial capital is 70km southwest of Ha Noi. Hoa Binh town and the adjacent area were the cradle of the Hoa Binh culture (see also Cac Nen Van Hoa O Viet Nam). Hoa Binh province is inhabited by Muong, Kinh (or Viet), Thai, Tay, Dao, H'Mong and Hoa. It attracts local and foreign visitors by such places as Kim Boi Hot Spring, Hoa Binh Hydro-Electric Power Plant on Da River...
Hoang Hoa Tham`Hoang Hoa Tham (De Tham,1858-1913) - an insurgent leader in the early 20th century - had Truong Van Nghia as true name and "Grey Tiger" as pseudonym. His native village was in Tien Lu (Hung Yen). He took part in the anti-French resistance at the age of 16, in the Yen The (Bac Giang) movement, then became a leader in 1892. The French had+to make peace with him twice. The insurrection spread throughout the midlands and the delta of Tonkin, even in Ha Noi. He also commanded the poisoning in Ha Noi Citadel in 1908. After the French had concentrated nearly 2,000 soldiers for an attack on Yen The (1909), the insurgents suffered heavy losses. Hoang Hoa Tham was betrayed and+murdered on February 10th 1913
Hue`Today's Hue is the provincial capital of Thua Thien - Hue.The melancholy beauty of Hue, capital of the last Vietnamese feudal regime, derives from the quiet Song Huong (Perfume River) weaving its course between rolling hills housing the temples and tombs of the Nguyen Kings This feature of Hue has been enhanced by the recent addition of many modern hotels and offices on the banks of the river. On the southern bank of Perfume River, construction has started beside the Huong Giang Hotel for the new, three-star, 138-room Hue Hotel. Hue is one of the three biggest tourist centres of Vietnam. Its attraction lies first of all in the many temples, palaces and mausoleums of Nha Nguyen (Nguyen Dynasty) built between 1805 and 1832. The old citadel measures 11 kilometres in circumference with a 21-metre thick wall and a flagpole standing 54.4 metres high. The Nguyen kings, from Tu Duc and Minh Mang to Dong Khanh and Thieu Tri were buried in mausoleums of different architectural styles. Hue also boasts nearly one hundred Buddhist pagodas and temples. Visitors should not miss Thien Mu Pagoda built in 1601 on a very poetic site on the bank of Perfume River, or the Tu Dam pagoda.=Among Hue's many tourist attractions are Perfume River, Ngu Mountain, Trang Tien and Phu Xuan bridges, Vong Canh (Belvedere) Hill, Bach Ma (White Horse) Mountain, Hai Van Pass, Tam Giang Lagoon, Thuan An and Canh Duong beaches and further north, the Cua Tung and Cua Viet estuaries. Hue also boasts the National College which was attended by patriotic Vietnameses, Duong Mo village with fascinating records from the fight against the French, and the museum devoted to Phan Boi Chau, a prominent patriot during the early years of French domination. From Hue, you can rent a car from the Thua Thien - Hue tourist company to visit the system of tunnels in Vinh Moc village dug during the Vietnam war and Hien Luong bridge at the demarcation line established between North and South Vietnam following the 1954 Geneva Conference. Then you can proceed to Con Tien and Doc Mieu, famous battle sites where vestiges of the US defence line are till visible, and further west, the mysterious Ho Chi Minh Trail. Visitors will never be bored by monotony or repetition during a ten-day or five-day package tour of Hue. If you are an admirer of antiquities, you may order a "royal feast" at the Huong Giang Hotel or sit on a "dragon" rowboat (which used to cater for the royal family only) and listen to the mellow song of young girls rowing. If you want to watch the quiet glory of dusk over the Huong River you can hire a room at the Huong Giang or Hue hotels. If you like to listen to the lapping of sea waves, go to Tan My Hotel on the beach at Thuan An. If you want a completely still night, you may choose Thuan Hoa or Morin hotels. Wherever you go you will be treated to the most varied traditional dishes of Hue, prepared and served by lovely girls dressed in the violet "ao dai" (long gown) which is also a typical feature of Hue.=From Ha Noi or Saigon, you can reach Hue by air, land and water. A twice weekly air service has just been inaugurated between Phu Bai airport in Hue and Tan Son Nhat airport in Thanh Pho Ho Chi Minh. A similar service will soon operate between Hue and Ha Noi, and arrangements are being made with Thai Airlines to link Phu Bai with Bangkok. In 1991 the Thua Thien - Hue tourist company received 60,000 guests including 10,000 foreigners. Investment on infrastructure will increase from 4.2 billion dong in 1991 to 10.5 billion this year.With its present capacity, Hue can receive at any one time 1,100 guests at both state-owned hotels which have more than 500 rooms, plus at private mini-hotels and homes To know more about Hue, please search the entry Thua Thien - Hue
La ma hoa`Romanize
Lac Long Quan`Lac Long Quan - son of Kinh Duong Vuong and Long Nu (Long Vuong's daughter) - had an unusual strength. His father entrusted him with governing the Linh Nam region, suppressing the demons and teaching the people to grow water-rice, to cook rice and to cut wood for building houses. Lac Long Quan married Au Co - De Lai's daughter - who would give birth to a 100-egg bag hatching into 100 sons. 50 out of them followed their father to go down in sea, and the remainder followed their mother to go up in the mountains and became the ancestors of the Viet people. The eldest son was nobody other than King Hung. So, the Viet people always consider themselves as " Dragon's children, Fairy's grandchildren". Geographically, this legend reflected the process of exploiting mountains and Northern Delta by the Viet people
Lao Cai`Lao Cai is one of several provinces situated on the Sino-Vietnamese borderline. It is in the northwestern part of the country. Topography of Lao Cai is diversified with rivers, high mountain peaks, steep and high mountain passes, deep streams and wide valleys. Lao Cai is home to primeval forests with several kinds of rare timber plants such as Po Mu (fukiena), Lat Hoa (chukrasia tabularis) and Cho Chi It is also the habitat of many kinds of medicinal herbs and rare animals including deer, wild boars, tigers... Lao Cai is also reputed for its mineral resources Sapa is the most attractive rendez-vous in Lao Cai. Visitors to Sapa can attempt the walk across a suspended bamboo bridge over Muong Hoa River Next to the bamboo bridge is a beautiful water fall known locally as Thac Bac (Silver Fall). The rooftop of Vietnam is called Fansipan mountain peak which is 3,141m above sea level. The highest peak in Vietnam is in Hoang Lien Son mountain range
Le Dai Hanh`As an excellent strategist, Le Dai Hanh (941-1005) was the king founding Nha Tien Le (Pre-Le Dynasty) (980-1009). His native land was in Tho Xuan (Thanh Hoa). Born in a poor family, Le Hoan (future Le Dai Hanh) was an orphan from his early childhood but very studious. He was appointed as Commander-in-chief by Dinh Tien Hoang. In 979, after Dinh Tien Hoang had been assassinated, Le Hoan became the regent because Dinh Tien Hoang 's successor remained too young. In 980, the Tong Chinese dynasty prepared to annex our country. In 981, the queen mother Duong Van Nga and the armed forces unanimously enthroned Le Hoang as Le Dai Hanh. In 981, Le Dai Hanh trounced the Tong invaders on Bach Dang River and at Chi Lang Pass. After Le Dai Hanh's death in 1005, his son Le Long Dinh killed his elder brother to usurp the throne. Indulging in debauchery, this cruel king Le Long Dinh always stretched out at the royal conferences, therefore he was also called Le Ngoa. Trieu (Ngoa. Trieu means "To stretch out at the royal conferences"). After his death, Ly Cong Uan replaced him in 1009 and founded Nha Hau Ly (Post-Ly Dynasty)
Luc lac`Oscillate, swing
Lui xui`Untidy, slovenly, shabby
Muong`dan toc Muong#With about 800,000 inhabitants, Muong ethnic group occupies 1.3% of the Vietnamese population. The Muong people's residential sphere set up an arc between the Vietnamese from Vinh Phu to west of Hoa Binh, then to midlands of Nghe An and Thanh Hoa. They belong to Viet-Muong linguistic group, but their culture is closer to Thai ethnic group. They live on growing rice, breeding, forging. Their residential area houses Hoa Binh Culture of the neolithic era along with which rice-growing appeared over 8,000 years BC Khua Luong ("Beating the mortar" in the Muong dialect) is a game played with wooden instruments by the Muong ethnic group, who settled in northern Vietnam in the early days of the nation's historyThe instruments of this game consist simply of mortars and pestles, all made of wood Mortars and pestles are very familiar items of use in the life of the Muong community. They are used to husk rice before it is cooked, or to crush lean meat to make gio, banh giay, and so on. Thus the sound of the pestle and mortar is very familiar to the Muong women. Gradually, it came to be used as a musical instrument producing familiar sounds and rhythms. Through generations, this musical instrument has known many refinements and finally was used as an instrument for a concert by both young people and the old people in the village. This musical instrument dates back many thousands of years and has been preserved to date as a precious tradition among the Muong ethnic group. It might have come into existence long before the Viet community knew how to melt copper to make bronze drums and bronze bells for musical instruments.=Nowadays, among the Muong community at Thuong Xuan, Thanh Hoa+province, there exist many Khua luong teams each comprising six to eight young girls. They can play up to 12 traditional concerts reflecting the landscape and the atmosphere of the Ban Muong (Muong villages)as well as the feelings of the people there. The most typical of the concerts are those depicting "a wedding party in the village", a scene of " Welcoming Guests", of "Waiting for the Bride" and of the wedding ceremony itself. In the "Welcoming Guests" item, a merry atmosphere is created through the sounds of pestle and mortar as the people busy themselves with husking rice and making cake to entertain the guests. In the "Waiting for the Bride" concert, there reigns an atmosphere of impatient longing for the bride. In the "Wedding Party", the stately sounds help people to get rid of the noisy crowd and enter a world of quiet felicity as the bride and groom gather under the cosy roof of their new house. Besides the four main concerts, there are some others such as "Welcoming New Rice", the "Early Rains", "Hymn to the Genie of Thunder". It is hard to imagine the perfection of the sounds and music unless you attend one of the ceremonies where khua luong concerts are performed. The music leaves a deep impression on the audience and, at times, tugs at the heartstrings
Nga hoang`(su hoc) Tsar, tzar
Nga van`Russian [language]
Nguyen Du`Born in an intellectual family, the writer Nguyen Du (16th century) graduated as bachelor. His native village was in Thanh Mien, Hai Duong. He had nurtured a good will for society, but later, became disheartened and led a secluded life. Nguyen Du was the author of Truyen Ky Man Luc#Nguyen Du (1766-1820) - a great classical poet - had Tien Dien (Nghi Xuan, Ha Tinh) as native land. Nguyen Du was descended from a noble mandarin family (his father and his elder brother had been prime ministers of Nha Hau Le), but he himself had to pass through many hardships in the 18th century full of troubles. Famous for writing talent, he only graduated as junior bachelor. In 1802, as a mandarin of Nha Nguyen, he was hauntingly worried about the current circumstances. His works were both realistic and romantic. He was the author of Truyen Kieu (a very popular poetic masterpiece), Van Chieu Hon, Bac Hanh Tap Luc and Nam Trung Tap Ngam. World Peace Council classifies Nguyen Du among+memorable cultural celebrities in the world
Nguyen Trai`Nguyen Trai (1380-1442) - a great politician, strategist, diplomat, poet - was born in Thang Long, and his paternal village located in Nhi Khe (Thuong Tin - Ha Tay). His mother was the daughter of Tran Nguyen Dan (a high-ranking mandarin of Nha Tran). His father was Nguyen Phi Khanh who had graduated as doctor. At the age of 20, Nguyen Trai also graduated as doctor and served in the Ho dynasty like his father. On the occurence of the Chinese invasion, Nguyen Phi Khanh was captured and marched off to China. Nguyen Trai was kept under surveillance in Dong Quan (Thang Long). Later, he fled in Lam Son to follow Le Loi (future Le Thai To), submitted Binh Ngo Sach (strategies of the people's war against the Ming invasion). After the enemy had been completely expelled, Nguyen Trai did his best to help Le Loi in the national reconstruction. In 1442, because of dishonest mandarins' great harm, Nguyen Trai and all his three related families were exterminated. His famous works were Binh Ngo Dai Cao, Quan Trung Tu Menh Tap, Quoc Am Thi Tap...
Nha Hau Le`Nha Hau Le (Post-Le Dynasty) was founded by Le Thai To after the resounding victory over the Ming invaders. Our country was Dai Viet with Dong Kinh (Ha Noi) as royal capital. The feudal centralism had the despotic trends, especially in the second half of the 15th century The economic, political, military, educational and cultural fields were considerably developed. Dai Viet became the powerful nation in Southeast Asia. Confucianism held a more and more important position, while the literature reached the apogee under the reign of Le Thanh Ton. Dai Viet defeated Cham Pa, occupied its royal city and set up the Quang Nam administrative division. Because of the ruling class' immoderate luxury, Post-Le Dynasty began to decline since the 17th century. Competition for power between warlords and peasant insurrections broke out everywhere. In 1527, Nha Mac (Mac Dynasty) usurped Nha Hau Le Under the pretext of restoring Nha Hau Le, Lords Nguyen and Trinh sought ways for suppressing Nha Mac. Between 1533 and 1788 was the period when Le passed through renaissance and decline
Nha Tay Son`Nha Tay Son (Tay Son Dynasty): After Lord Nguyen Phuc Khoat's death, the power-usurping courtier Truong Phuc Loan became utterly cruel.The peasant insurrection led by three brothers Nguyen Nhac, Nguyen Lu and Nguyen Hue broke out in 1777. In 1786, Tay Son troops suppressed Trinh and Nguyen Lords, defeated the Siam aggressors and reunified the country. In 1789, Quang Trung beat 290,000 Manchurian soldiers to pieces. The Tay Son times were a glorious period of the Vietnamese history. The Tay Son authorities tried to restore the economy and to develop the national culture. The kings were Trung uong hoang de Nguyen Nhac (1786-1793), Quang Trung (1788-1792) and Quang Toan (1792-1802)
Nha y`thoughtful idea, thoughtfulness, amiability
No en`Christmas
Nung`dan toc Nung#With about 650,000 inhabitants, Nung ethnic group occupies 1.05% of the Vietnamese population. Divided into many branches (Nung Phan Sinh, Nung Chao, Nung Inh..), they live in Cao Bang, Lang Son, Tuyen Quang, Lao Cai, Yen Bai, Ha Giang. This ethnic group migrated late to Vietnam and had relations close to the Tay people. Their popular literature and arts is abundant in poems and tales..... They are courageous, battle-tested, good at farming and able to trade. After 1954, many of them migrated to Eastern Cochinchina and Central Highlands
Phan Boi Chau`Phan Boi Chau (Sao Nam, 1867-1940) - a strong-willed patriotic scholar with Phan Van San as true name - had his native village in Nam Dan ( Nghe An). His father had been an unsuccessful Confucian scholar. Reputed for being an infant prodigy, he graduated as first laureate of interprovincial examination at the age of 33. With an anti-French strong will, he founded Hoi Duy Tan (Association of Reformists). In 1905, he came to Japan to seek reinforcements and promoted the Dong Du (Advance towards the East) movement. Expelled in 1908, he came to China to found Viet Nam Quang Phuc Hoi (Association for Restoration of Vietnam) in 912, and was imprisoned in Kwantung (Quang Dong) between 1913 and 917. After having met Nguyen ai Quoc in 1925, he intended to change his strategies but was kidnapped in Shangai by the French. He was sentenced to hard labour for life, put under surveillance in Hue and died there. His life reflected the ups and downs of the Vietnamese revolution after the Can Vuong movement and before the birth of Indochinese Communist Party (constitutional monarchy - bourgeois democracy  neo-democratic revolution). He wrote many works in Chinese and Vietnamese languages to awaken the patriotism, such as Hai Ngoai Huyet Thu, Nguc Trung Thu, Phan Boi Chau Nien Bieu, Khong Hoc Dang...
Phan Dinh Phung`Phan Dinh Phung (1847-1895) - an insurgent leader in Can Vuong (Royalist) Movement - had his native village in La Son (Ha Tinh). Born in a Confucianist family, he graduated as doctor and served Nha Nguyen (Nguyen Dynasty). In 1883, he was dismissed and came back to his native village. In 1885, when Can Vuong Decree was promulgated by King Ham Nghi, he rose up in arms against the French invaders. This 10-year resistance inflicted heavy losses to the French. Phan Dinh Phung died of a disease in 1895
Phan Van Tri`With Bao An district, Gia Dinh province (present-day Thanh Pho Saigon) as native village, Phan Van Tri (Junior Bachelor Tri, 830-1910) - a patriotic poet - graduated as bachelor in the Nguyen times (1849). Being Nguyen Dinh Chieu 's close friend, he set up a school and taught instead of serving the royal court. His anti-French strong will was reflected by engaging in a poetic polemic with Ton Tho Tuong (Phan Van Tri's fellow poet collaborating with the French)
Phan hoc`Sanskritism
Phan ngu`Sanskrit
Phi bao hiem`Premium
Phong Trao Yeu Nuoc`Phong Trao Yeu Nuoc signifies " Patriotic movements".#Resistance war against Nam Han Dynasty (938): In 938, from Chau ai (Thanh Hoa), Ngo Quyen led his army to the North to punish the traitor Kieu Cong Tien who would seek reinforcements from Nam Han Dynasty In late 938, the king of Nam Han Dynasty ordered his son Hoang Thao to command the navy for an attack on our country while stationing personally the rescue troops in Kwangtung (China). Ngo Quyen took Dai La Citadel, killed Kieu Cong Tien and made preparations for the oncoming resistance war. The Nam Han troops were defeated and Hoang Thao was killed in action on Bach Dang river. The king of Nam Han Dynasty cancelled marching orders and gave up his aggression intention. The resistance war against Nam Han brought an end to more than 1,000 years of Chinese domination.#Anti-Tong resistance wars: After King Dinh Tien Hoang had been murdered, his son was too young (6 years old) when succeeding him. On this occasion, the Tong Chinese dynasty launched a large-scale aggression on Dai Co Viet (future Vietnam). Proclaimed king, Le Hoan (future Le Dai Hanh) hastened to prepare for an anti-Tong resistance war. In early 981, the Tong navy and infantry rushed overwhelmingly into Dai Co Viet. The enemy navy was beaten to pieces on Bach Dang River The enemy infantry was stopped short in Lang Son and strictly pursued Their commander-in-chief Hau Nhan Bao was killed in action. The Tong dynasty resigned itself to cancel marching orders. Aware of Tong Dynasty's aggression intention, Ly Thuong Kiet took the initiative to attack it first for a self-defence. In October 1075, Ly Thuong Kiet commanded the navy to occupy the Kham Chau, Liem Chau estuaries and to besiege Ung Chau Citadel while destroying its food warehouses Then he hastened to come home to set up the defence line on the Cau river for an oncoming resistance war. In late 1075, the Tong troops rushed into Vietnam with the determination of occupying Thang Long, but after two attacks, were stopped short at the aforesaid defence line and gradually worn out. In addition, the Tong navy was stopped short at sea In early 1077, Ly Thuong Kiet switched to a strategic counter-offensive. The Tong army resigned itself to "make peace", then went home in March 1077. The Tong dynasty's aggression intention was crushed since.#Anti-Mongol resistance wars (13th century): In 1258, trying in vain to entice Nha Tran (Tran Dynasty) into surrender, the Mongol dynasty ordered its 30,000 soldiers to invade our country. Tran Thu Do, Tran Quoc Tuan (Tran Hung Dao) and our king withdrew out of Thang Long, then all of a sudden made a counter-offensive. The enemy ran back to China in an utterly agitated state. In 1285, the crown prince Thoat Hoan (Togan) led 500,000 soldiers to attack Vietnam. The Tran troops withdrew temporarily to make a guerilla war before launching a general counter-offensive. The invaders ran helter skelter, and Thoat Hoan escaped by creeping into a bronze pipe. In 1287, the Mongol dynasty mobilized 500,000 soldiers (strengthened with navy and food supply fleet) for the third invasion on Vietnam. They were defeated again on Bach Dang River (1288) by the Tran troops under the command of Tran Quoc Tuan (Tran Hung Dao).#Anti-Ming resistance war: Under the pretext of overthrowing Ho Dynasty to restore Nha Tran (Tran Dynasty), two hundred thousand Ming aggressors rushed into our country in 1406. To prepare for an anti-aggression war, Ho Dynasty had set up a 400-kilometre long defence line from Tan Vien Mountain to Nam Ha (Ha Bac). But the resistance was unsuccessful. On January 20th 1407, the Ming invaders mastered Da Bang (present-day Ha Tay) - key position on that defence line - and flooded into Thang Long on January 22nd 1407. Consequently, the Ho army resigned itself to come back to Thanh Hoa. In June 1407, Ho Quy Ly and his trusted courtiers were captured and taken to China. Our country fell again to the foreign domination after nearly five centuries of independence.* Lam Son Insurrection (1418-1428): In 1406, under the pretext of overthrowing Ho Dynasty to restore Nha Tran (Tran Dynasty), Ming Dynasty invaded our country. In 1418, in Lam Son forests (Thanh Hoa), Le Loi (future Le Thai To) launched a 10-year insurrection with the wholehearted help of Nguyen Trai. Between 1418 and 1423, the guerilla war endured many disadvantages due to the enemy blockade. Between 423 and 1424, the insurgents made negotiations to keep their strength intact. Between 1424 and 1425, they were on the offensive by liberating Nghe An, Thanh Hoa, Tan Binh (Quang Binh), Thuan Hoa. Between 1425 and 1428, they launched the general offensive throughout the country. Resounding victories were Tot Dong-Chuc Dong, Chi Lang-Xuong Giang. On December 16th 1427, at Dong Quan (Ha Noi), Vuong Thong declared to withdraw his Ming troops. In January 1428, all the Ming invaders left Vietnam.#Anti-Manchurian resistance war (1788-1789): From the fact Le Chieu Thong had sought reinforcements from China, the Manchurian dynasty ordered Ton Si Nghi and 200,000 soldiers to invade Vietnam. By Ngo Thi Nham 's plan, the Tay Son troops left Bac Ha to return to Tam Diep (Ninh Binh) and Bien Son (Thanh Hoa). Just after receiving this information (Dec.21st 1788), Nguyen Hue proclaimed himself emperor Quang Trung and gave marching orders without any delay. Within 35 days, Nguyen Hue^.'s troops took the Gian Khau post at 90km from Thang Long. In the night of January 28th 1789, they forced the Ha Hoi post (at 20km from Thang Long) to surrender. In the morning of January 0th, the Ngoc Hoi, Khuong Thuong and Dong Da posts fell to Nguyen Hue. The Manchurian general Sam Nghi Dong committed suicide by hanging himself. The Tay Son army flooded into Thang Long  Ton Si Nghi (commander-in-chief of the Manchurian troops) escaped by crossing the pontoon bridge on Song Hong (Red River). To avoid the Tay Son army's pursuit, Ton Si Nghi ordered to cut the pontoon bridge and an enormous number of invaders drowned. In the afternoon of January 30th 789, Quang Trung and his main army flooded into Thang Long. The victory over the Manchurian aggressors was one of the most resounding feats of arms in Vietnamese history.#Ba Dinh Insurrection (1886-1887) was commanded by Pham Banh and Dinh Cong Trang against the French. Ba Dinh referred to three temples in three villages Thuong Tho, Mau Thinh, My Khe. The aggressors suffered many heavy losses due to that solid revolutionary base. After two unsuccessful attacks, the French besieged it so severely that the insurgents moved to Ma Cao (Thanh Hoa) and disintegrated. Pham Banh committed suicide and Dinh Cong Trang was killed.#Bai Say Insurrection was commanded by Nguyen Thien Thuat and Doc Tit in response to Can Vuong Decree. The base was very solid and inaccessible to the enemy. The insurgents applied skilfully the guerilla tactics and inflicted numberless damages to the French between 885 and 1892. Later, Nguyen Thien Thuat had to flee in China and Doc Tit was exiled to Algeria.#Huong Khe Insurrection was commanded by Phan Dinh Phung and Cao Thang in response to Can Vuong Decree. Their base located in the Huong Son forests (Ha Tinh). Being able to make the rifles in the latest style, the insurgents achieved the Vu Quang resounding victory.#Thai Nguyen Insurrection referred to the one of Vietnamese soldiers and prisoners under the command of Doi Can (Sergeant Can) and Luong Ngoc Quyen. After having killed the French commander, the insurgents liberated 203 prisoners and mastered the provincial capital. 623 insurgents (workers, peasants and civil servants included) had to face more than 2,000 French soldiers supported by artillery and navy
Phuc am`The Gospel
Tay Bac`DISCOVERING Tay Bac (North-West). There was a time, not so long ago, when Tay Bac or the north-west region of Vietnam, was so remote an area that people were scared to go there. In retrospect, the remoteness seems to have been a blessing in disguise. The region's wilderness, its mountains and culture that are unique to it have been drawing an increasing number of domestic and foreign tourists. Tourist facilities in the region are still insufficient, but that cannot stop the back-packers from going there and taking in the splendid scenic vistas on offer. The ethnic minorities and their way of life as yet untouched by modern civilisation are another alluring factor They come here in organised tours, informal groups, or even individually on motorbikes. The sharp bends and curves in the mountainous area are thrilling to negotiate and offer marvellous views of the Thai and Tay tribal villages from the heights, and of the H'Mong houses rising out of the rocks and clouds atop the mountains. Visitors can also meet ethnic people in colourful attire on their way to the market or the fields. The population here lives on rice and handloom cloth which are woven with colourful ethnic motifs. The cloth is sold in every houseIn Tay Bac, weekly markets held every Sunday has presented the same scenes for decades  a couple going to the market with the husband on a horse and the wife walking behind; youngsters dressed in their best, chatting, drinking and playing the traditional flute. Friendly as they are, the H'Mong and Dao boys do not shy away having a drink with a foreigner and sharing a piece of (maize cake). Sapa is already a popular tourist destination in the Tay Bac region. Here also, the visitor can get glimpses of the ethnic minority way of life. These communities cultivate, maize, rice and other grains and vegetables on terraced fields that are major attraction. The age-old practice of the market being the rendez-vous for young people to court still continues, though there have been concerns about it being disturbed by domestic and foreign tourists. In the Tay Bac region, however, there remains plenty for the visitor to discover and savour
Thai`With nearly 900,000 inhabitants (1.45% of the Vietnamese population), Thai ethnic group is divided into Thai trang (White Thai) and Thai den (Black Thai) on the basis of the clothing colour. The residential sphere spreads from Red River right bank to Thanh Hoa, Nghe An Highlands. It is easy for them to mix with native ethnic groups. They settle in valleys surrounding immense fields (Muong Thanh, Quang Huy, Than Uyen, Nghia Lo), and live on farming, breeding, weaving. The Thai people has its own writing and a very developed popular culture#In the western part of Nghe An Province, there reside about 13,000 ethnic Thais belonging to the sub-groups of Tay Thanh, Tay Muoi, and others. Like their counterparts in the North-West of the country, the Thai community here possesses a rich culture that has been built up over the centuries. In their everyday working life, the Thai minority has developed a rich and abundant culture. Many traditional rites and festivals exist along with other Thai cultural activities. In this article, we introduce one particular cultural event - the Thai's Cave-Picnicking Festival. According to the elders in the community, the Cave-Visiting Festival of the Thai people living in the mountain villages surrounding Quy Hop dates back to time immemorial, and was in existence up to the middle of the twentieth century. Every year during the period from the 3rd through the 10th day of Thang Gieng (the Lunar Year's first month following Nguyen Dan - the Lunar New Year's Day), the Thai folk in and around the locality flock to the Cave - Picnicking Festival The event takes place in Tham Mon (Mon Cave) located in the Chau Quy commune, Quy Hop district. The Cave visitors are of all ages, but mainly single young people. They are natives from the villages of Quy Hop and other neighbouring districts in West Nghe An. Visitors are allowed to enter the cave only once a day until they find themselves a boy or girl friend, and return home when the festival ends. It is an inviolable rule that cave visitors must not bring in a lamp, fire or any source of light.+All visitors come into the cave for the festive occasion amid complete darkness. Young people first enter in groups, then disperse and move further into the dark cave. Once inside the cave, the girls usually gather in small groups of two or three, and stand timidly in the cave alleys. The boys, also in small groups, grope in the dark for girl friends. Every action must be made by hand, and every move made by foot as calling, speaking or shouting are completely forbiden... Having found a friend of the opposite sex, the boy can talk with and court the girl in the cave. If they find each other suitable, the couple come out of the cave hand-in-hand and go to the boy's home to announce their love to his parents. The parents then take the responsibility of guardianship, by assisting and creating favourable conditions for the couple to become husband and wife. That the Festival takes place in such a dark cave makes it an extremely fun-filled and enjoyable experience. All unmarried Thai boys and girls are eager to go to the Cave- Visiting Festival to try their luck at seeking a life companion. The Thai men traditionally look for a pretty girl of marriageable age who must be well-built and in good health Therefore, in the cave, a boy first makes sure that he finds himself the right girl, that is, he asks in whispers after her name, her whereabouts and her parents so as not to mistake a blood sister or relative whom he cannot marry. He then feels her thoroughly to find out whether she is strong and sturdy. If satisfied, he then starts to exchange intimacies, courts her and ultimately leads her out of the cave. Such a play of courtship all in the dark cave with the boys fumbling for the girls who hide themselves in the cave gorges or alleys cannot be free of conflicts and jostlings among the men. A struggle inevitably ensues when a boy finds a girl who has a flaw and tries to get rid of her. Similar to practices such as the "moonlight dance" or "moonlight stroll" of some other ethnic minorities, the Cave - Picnicking Festival of the Thai community in western Nghe An is a cultural activity - a community-gathering place for dating and courting couples.+It is a healthy practice and requires the participants to strictly adhere to the community's rules and customs. In earlier times, when social events were virtually non-existent among the Thais, the Cave-Picnicking festival presented a good opportunity for young people to discover and exchange love. The Festival in fact was an indispensable part of the cultural life of the Thai people in western Nghe An up to the first half of this century
Thanh Hoa`Thanh Hoa is a large province of Central Vietnam. Thanh Hoa is composed of three categories of mountain, plain and mid-land terrains. Its coastline is 102km in length. Being the dwelling place of the ancient Viets, Thanh Hoa is proud of the glorious Dong Son culture (see also Cac Nen Van Hoa o Viet Nam). Only 16 km from Thanh Hoa City, Sam Son Beach is very good for bathing. Beside sandy beaches, Sam Son also has some scenic spots such as Trong Mai Island, Doc Cuoc Temple and Co Tien Mount. Citadel of the Ho Dynasty (Thanh Nha Ho) was built in 1397. It was not only the location for the central government, but also a quite military project. All the ancient citadels in Vietnam such as the citadels of Hoa Lu and Co Loa were made of earth, the only exception being the Ho Dynasty Citadel, which was wholly built in block granite, depicting the power of creativeness and industriousness of the labouring people more than six centuries ago. The Ho Citadel Dynasty only existed for 10 years (1397-1407), but its vestiges are still surprising because many of its technical questions remain the unknowns #Ba Trieu (Lady Trieu) Temple is located at the foot of the Tung mountain (Trieu Loc commune, Thanh Hoa province). This mountain was the centre of the insurrection led by her. Ba Trieu whose full name was Trieu Thi Trinh was a beloved national heroine. She led the nation in an uprising against the northern invasion in the 3rd century. Ritual ceremonies are held yearly at the temple on the 21st day of the lunar second month. People on pilgrimage to the temple often recall Ba Trieu s outright declaration: "I want to drive over strong wind, sail over strong waves and chase the foreign invaders out of the country, and I will not give up myself to be their servant-concubine". Ma River is the largest one in Thanh Hoa. Nearing the coast, the river meets a high mountain which resembles a dragon's head, from which the bridge spanning that part of river derives its name. In the early 20th century, French engineers tried in vain to built an iron bridge over Ma River. In 1905, they completed a suspension bridge only to see it destroyed in the anti-French war. When peace returned in 1954, Vietnamese engineers applied new engineering techniques and built an iron bridge. The new Ham Rong bridge was completed on May 19, 1964. The bridge gained fame because it became the main target of US air forces in the efforts to break the North-South supply lines
Thoi Dai Hung Vuong`It was in Thoi Dai Hung Vuong (Hung Vuong Era) that the first State of the Vietnamese people (Van Lang nation of the Lac Viet people) took shape. By the C14 radioactive method, the archaeologists demonstrate that Hung Vuong Era was not legendary (18 Hung kings of the Hong Bang times were only symbolical). The inhabitants grew vegetables and tubers (especially sticky rice), bred chickens,pigs, dogs, buffaloes and oxen. The hunting and fishing activities were secondary. The casting and forging technics appeared in Dong Son Culture (see also Cac Nen Van Hoa O Viet Nam). The carpentry and the earthenwares were rather prosperous. The usual clothes included embroidered skirts and brassieres The food included banh chung and banh giay (square cakes made of sticky rice), wine, pickled fish, betel-nuts.. The spiritual life consisted of singing, dancing, carving, painting, tattooing. Sun, angels and totems were worshipped. Differentiation between the rich and the poor resulted in social differentiation, and Van Lang nation came into being
Ton That Thuyet`Ton That Thuyet (1835-1913) - patriotic general of Nha Nguyen (Nguyen Dynasty) and deputy minister of national defence - was at the head of the pro-war camp. After the unsuccessful attack on the French barracks in the night of July 4th 1885, Ton That Thuyet escorted King Ham Nghi to Ha Tinh where the latter would promulgate Can Vuong+Decree. After having come to China and tried in vain to seek reinforcements, Ton That Thuyet lived in exile there until his death
Tran Thu Do`Tran Thu Do (1194-1264) was an eminent politician. With Hung Ha (Thai Binh) as native village, Tran Thu Do was born in a dignitary's family. He commanded the corps in defence of Nha Hau Ly (Post-Ly Dynasty)'s royal capital, then made artful arrangements for the abdication of Ly Chieu Hoang in favour of Tran Canh, which would form the Nha Tran (Tran Dynasty). Becoming the royal chancellor, he was a good ruler and achieved many merits in the resistance war against the Mongol invaders in 1258. Tran Thu Do was famous for his saying: " Whenever my head has not fallen on the ground, I beg Your Majesty not to worry"
Viet`Viet ethnic group occupies 87% of the Vietnamese population. From the first residential area in Hong (Red River), Ca and Ma basin, they gradually advanced southwards together with other ethnic groups. The concentration was noticeable in the deltas from lower section of Red River, Coastal Centre to lower section of Mekong River. Viet's residential sphere spread uninterruptedly from the Ngoc cape to Ha Tien where the continental and oceanic ecological environments met each other The society was tightly organized in form of hamlets, villages, communes and townlets. Each village was a factor maintaining the traditional social structure of the Viet ethnic group and where small trade, agricultural and handicraft production took place. Its familiar landscapes resided in rice-fields, gardens, ponds, breeding and handicraft occupations Linguistically, there was the transition from Chinese language to nom language, then to quoc ngu (national language) with Latin-based letters in the late 19th century
Viet Nam`Vietnam#Different from China in the north, Vietnam referred to the Viet community in the south. Through its 4,000-year history, Viet Nam was named Van Lang, Au Lac, Van Xuan, Dai Co Viet, Dai Viet, Dai Ngu, Dai Viet. Under Thoi Bac Thuoc (Chinese domination), Vietnam was called Giao Chau, An Nam Do Ho Phu (Dominated An Nam). Since 1804, Nha Nguyen renamed this country Viet Nam. However, King Minh Mang (Nha Nguyen - Nguyen Dynasty) himself admitted that the name Viet Nam had existed long before. Nguyen Trai, Nguyen Binh Khiem and Le Quy Don had also used the name Viet Nam. In 1991, in Dong Dang (Lang Son), the archaeologists discovered the Thuy Mon Dinh stela with the words Viet Nam on it. Under the French domination, Vietnam was named An Nam, and An Nam also referred to Central Vietnam itself. The name Viet Nam has been officially and popularly used from 1945 till our days.#Besides 53 other ethnic groups (Dao, Ba Na, H'Mong, Hoa, Kho Me, Muong, Mo Nong, Nung, Xo Dang, Thai, Gia Rai, E De, Cham...), Viet (Viet or Kinh ethnic group) occupies up to 87% of the Vietnamese population. Many of ethnic minorities have the unnoticeable economic and cultural development, or remain in a primitive state.*See also Cac Nen Van Hoa Viet Nam 
Vinh`Xem Nghe An
Vung Tau`Xem Ba Ria-Vung Tau
a`Aah! Oof(expression of suffering)#Asia#Asian, Asiatic#Lass#O; oh (exclamation of surprise, regret, ect.)#By the way#Acre (100 square meters)#Oh! (exclamation of surprise)#By the way
a dao`Singsong girl, geisha
a dua`To ape, to chime in, to join in, to take a leaf out of sb's book
a giang ho`rostitute,#treet-walker
a ha`Aha, ha; hurrah, hurray
a hoan`Abigail ; maidservant
a khau`aphasia
a khoi`the second winner in a contest
a kim`Metalloid
a phien`Opium
a rap`rabia
a tong`To act as (be) an accomplice to someone, to act as (be) an accessory to someone, to make common cause with someone
a uom`To lump together
a-can-dinh`rgentina, the Argentine
ac`Crow, raven#(cu) The sun#Cruel, malicious#Severe, fierce#Ripping, rattling good
ac ba`Cruel landlord, village tyrant
ac cam`Antipathy, aversion, enmity, bad blood, ill feeling
ac chien`To fight violently, to fight fiercely
ac khau`nhu {ac mieng}
ac la`Magpie
ac liet`Very fierce, very violent
ac mieng`Foul-mouthed, foul-tongued
ac mo`Parrot#Shrew, termagant
ac mo ni ca`Mouth-organ
ac mong`Nightmare
ac nghiet`Cruel, venomous, harsh, spiteful
ac on`Enemy-hired killer, wicked thug#Ruffianly, thug-like
ac phu`icked woman
ac qui`attery
ac quy`Demon, fiend
ac ta`unset, declining sun
ac tam`Malice, malignity, ill will
ac thu`Beast of prey
ac tinh`Malign, malignant
ac y`Malice, malignity, ill will
ach`Yoke#To come to a standstill, to be at a standstill#To stop#Having a bloated (blown up) stomach, feeling bloated (blown up)#lump; flop
ai`Oh! Ah! (exclamation of pain or surprise)#Pass#Hurdle, ordeal, trial#Rotten#Aerated and loose#Who, whom, someone, somebody, anyone, anybody
ai ai`Everyone, everybody
ai an`Tender love, conjugal affection, passion#To live in conjugal affection
ai cha`Oh! Ha!
ai dieu`ulogy; condolence
ai doi`Fancy
ai huu`Friendly society, guild
ai khanh`y darling; my dear
ai luc`Affinity
ai mo`o attach; to feel attach to
ai nam ai nu`Hermaphroditic, bisexual, androgynous
ai nay`each and all, one and all
ai ngai`To feel compassion for
ai nhi lan`reland
ai oan`Plaintive
ai phi`avorite queen
ai quan`Frontier pass
ai quoc`To be a patriot, to love one's country
ai tinh`Love, passion
am`Damp, humid#Small temple, small pagoda; hermitage, secluded hut#Thick fish soup flavoured with herbs#To possess#To annoy, to worry#To darken, to stain, to obscure#To boom, to bang#Noisy, boisterous#To carry in one's arms#Yin (opposite to Yang)#Sound#Syllable#Negative, lunar, female#pot; kettle#warm; tepid
am a`nhu am u
am a am ach`xem am ach
am a am u`xem am u#xem am u
am ach`Labouring, ploughing, plodding#Puffed up, windy, flatulent
am am`Roaring, rumbling#Tepid, lukewarm, warmish
am anh`To obsess, to haunt#Haunting worry, obsession
am ap`Overbrimmed#cosy, warm
am ba`ound-wave
am chen`ea-set; tea-sevice
am chi`To insinuate, to allude to, to hint (at)
am cuc`Cathode
am cung`ell; hades#snug, cosy#harmonious, united
am dam`Gloomy, dreary, sombre
am dao`Vagina
am dieu`Tune, melody#Strain
am duong`Ying and Yang, opposites
am giai`(Musical) scale#usical scale
am hach`litoris
am hai`To attempt the life of
am hanh`enis; the male organ of copulation
am hieu`Secret signal, coded signal#To realize; to know inside out; to have a good command of ; to know like the back of one's hand; to have a thorough knowledge of; to be expert in (at,on) ; to be well-informed about, to be familiar with
am ho`Vulva
am hoc`Acoustics
am hon`Soul, wraith, manes
am huong`Sonority#Harmony, music
am i`Noisy, boisterous, strident, uproarious#Smouldering, dull and lasting
am khi`Miasmatic atmosphere
am lich`Lunar calendar, moon calendar
am luat`Prosody
am luong`olume
am mao`ubic hair of man and woman
am muoi`Shady, dubious, underhand, sinister
am muu`Plot, scheme
am nang`crotum
am nhac`Music#he Kinh and all ethnic minorities in Vietnam have a time-honoured tradition of music and dance. This is evidenced by the figures seen dancing to music which were engraved on the bronze drums unearthed at Dong Son (Thanh Hoa province) and lithophones discovered in Tay Nguyen Highlands and other relics. Besides royal court music, there was also a rich vein of music which was closely attached to the daily lives of the working masses. Thousands of diverse musical tunes have been collected from this source. From Quan Ho folk songs in the North to Hue songs (songs from the Perfume River), "guessing game" songs, satirical songs, joking songs and numerous songs in southern provinces, all are characterised by a profound sensibility and poetic, lyrical sense. After 1945, royal court music was underdeveloped. But folk music flourished more than ever before along with the increasingly popular modern music
am no`Well off; comfortable
am o`half-baked#perfunctory, haphazard#nhu am u
am pe`mpere
am phu`Hell, Hades
am sac`imbre; tone-colour
am sat`To assassinate
am ta`Dictation
am tham`Silent
am than`odness#abia
am thanh`Sound
am thap`Humid, damp, dank
am thi`To hint, to insinuate, to suggest#To insinuate by suggestion
am thoa`am nhac) diapason; pitchl
am thuc`o eat and drink
am ti`nhu am phu
am tich`China teapot
am tiet`Syllable
am tin`News
am u`Gloomy, dreary, sombre#To hum and haw, to hum and ha, to hem and haw#to hum and haw
am uc`Full of pent-up anger, full of pent-up resentment
am uot`Wet
am van`hyme
am vat`oman's gernital organ
am vi`Phoneme
am vi hoc`Phonology, phonemics
an`High and narrow table#Case#Sentence#To obstruct, to block the way#Safe, secure#Seal#To press#To jam, to cram#To eat, to feed, to take, to have#To thrust#To hide#To seclude oneself from the world#Latent#avour; grace
an Do giao`Hinduism
an ai`nhu ai an
an ba ni`Greogr) Albania
an bai`To preordain, to foreordain, to predestine
an bam`To sponge on, to live on
an ban`Printed matter#To dress
an boc`o eat with the fingers
an bot`To take stealthy rake off, to get pickings, to appropriate part of profits
an ca`o win a bet
an can`Solicitous, thoughtful
an canh`o take sides with someone; to be in collusion
an cap`To steal, to filch, to pilfer
an chac`o be on sure
an chan`To appropriate part of
an chay`To keep a vegetarian diet
an chet`To take unfair advantage of
an chi`rinted matters ; printed paper
an choi`To indulge in dissipation, to sink in depravity, to live a debauched life, to lead a life of debauchery
an co`o feast; to attend a banquet
an com`o have a meal; to take a meal
an com thang`o board
an cu`To seclude oneself from the world#o live in peace
an cuoi`o participate in a wedding banquet;to attend a wedding
an cuop`To rob
an da`Caustic
an dat`To seclude oneself and lead a leisurely life
an dien`To be stylish, to dress smartly
an dinh`To define, to lay down
an dong`To live from hand to mouth
an du`Metaphor
an duong`To convalesce#To use as travel provisions, to spend during travel
an dut`To prevail over, to get the better of
an gia`To strike a bargain, to come to terms
an giac`To sleep soundly
an giai`o win a prize
an giam`To mitigate the punishment of
an gian`To cheat
an gio`o celebrate the anniversary of someone's death
an hai`To eat one's head off, to live as a parasite
an han`To feel regret, to feel regretful, to repent
an hanh`Print and publish
an hien`Now appear, now disappear; to loom
an hiep`To bully, to tyrannize
an hoa hong`o receive a commission
an hoc`Indianism#To study
an hoi`To propose ritually (with an offering to the girl's parents)
an hoi lo`o take a bribe
an hue`Favour
an huong`To enjoy peacefully, to spend peacefully
an khang`xem khang an
an khong`To live in idleness#To appropriate, to trick out of
an khop`To fit#To tally, to fit in with
an kiem`Seal and sword
an kieng`o be on a diet
an lai`o make profits
an lam`To work for one's living
an lan`o enlarge; to spread
an loat`To print
an loat pham`Printed matter
an loi`To obey, to take advice of#To go back upon one's word
an luong`o receive one's salary
an mac`To dress
an man`To eat meat
an mang`Murder
an manh`To work stealthily for one's own profits
an may`To beg (for a living, for aid..)#Beggar
an mon`To eat away, to corrode, to erode
an mung`To celebrate (with feasts and rejoicings)
an nam`To be lodged, to be accommodated#To live as man and wife, to sleep together
an nan`To repent, to show repentance (remorse, penitence), to eat humble pie
an nap`To take cover
an nau`To lurk
an nghi`To rest in peace and quiet
an nghia`Feeling of gratitude (for favour received..)
an ngu`To obstruct the access into
an nguoi`to gain advantage over others by one's wits, to get the better of others by one's wits
an nhan`Benefactor, benefactress#Leisured, leisurely
an nhip`To be in tune
an ninh`Security
an noi`to speak, to say, to express oneself
an o`to be accommodated, to be housed#to conduct oneself, to behave
an oan`ratitude and resentment
an pham`nhu an loat pham
an phan`To feel smug
an phi`Legal costs, law expenses
an quan`rinting-house; printing-office
an quit`o eat without paying; to evade paying
an roi`to devour voraciously
an sat`Feudal provincial mandarin in charge of criminal cases
an si`Recluse, hermit, anchorite#etired scholar
an so`Unknown (quantity)
an song`o eat uncooked food
an suong`To be a night-bird, to walk the streets
an tam`xem yen tam
an tang`To bury
an tap`o gobble
an tet`o celebrate the New Year
an tham`reedy ; gluttonous
an than`To act as a tranquillizer
an the`To take oath, to swear brotherhood (loyalty..)
an thu`High and narrow table#o sample food, to taste
an thua`To play for the vanity of winning#To make it, to succeed#o eat remains
an tiec`o attend a banquet; to feast
an tien`To take bribes#To bring good results
an tieu`To spend money
an tin`Official seal
an tinh`Deep feeling of gratitude#Full of gratitude, full of deep affection#Secret feeling, secret intimate sentiment
an toa`To take a seat, to be seated
an toan`Safe
an treo`Suspended sentence
an tri`To banish, to exile
an trom`To steal, to burgle
an tu hinh`eath-sentence; death penalty
an tuong`(cu) Hidden physiognomic features#Impression
an ui`To comfort, to console
an uong`To eat and drink#To give feasts, to entertain lavishly
an va`To eat without rice#To stage a sit-down (until one's debt is paid..)
an vi`To be seated, to be in one's seat
an vung`o eat stealthily; to eat on the sly
an xa`To amnesty, to grant amnesty
an xen`o graft
an xin`To beg
an xoi`To eat (consume) prematurely#To be impatient for result
an y`Implication, hint#To be in agreement (in harmony) with one another, to sympathize with one another#Acting harmoniously, acting in perfect teamwork
ang`Fleece (of cloud), remarkable piece (of literary work), a glorious period (of war)#To make a rough estimate#To yelp#crock; container for areca-nuts and betel
ang ang`bout; approximately#of a dog) to yap; to yelp
ang chung`Approximately
ang hong`To remain silent, to be silenced
anh`Clove#Light, glare#Lustre#Elder brother#First cousin, cousin german (son of one's father's or mother's elder brother or sister)#Image#Photograph, picture
anh ach`xem ach
anh anh`Gleaming, glimmerring
anh ao`irtual image
anh chi`Ringleader, chieftain
anh dao`Cherry
anh den`amplight
anh dung`Of great fortitude
anh em`Brothers, siblings#Mates, comrades
anh hung`Hero#Heroic, hero-like
anh hung ca`Epic, saga
anh hung chu nghia`Characteristic of self-seeking heroism, adventurous, reckless
anh huong`Influence, effect, impact
anh linh`Hallowed memory (of a deceased person)
anh lua`ire-light
anh minh`Clear-sighted and able
anh nang`unlight; sunshine
anh nuoi`Male cook
anh quan`Clear-sighted and able monarch
anh sang`Light
anh tai`Luminary, outstanding talent
anh thu`Heroine
anh tuan`minent person
ao`(dia ly) Austria#Jacket, coat, tunic, dress, gown#Case, wrapping#Crust, coat#Cloak, cover#Illusive, illusory#Imaginary#Impetuously#To rush#Pond#To measure roughly, to measure approximately
ao anh`Illusion, phantasm, phantom#Mirage
ao ao`Impetuous
ao at`Impetuous, vehement
ao canh`Short jacket
ao choang`Overcoat, gown
ao dai`Glowing tunic, dress
ao giac`Illusion, optical illusion#Fancy, fantasy
ao giap`uirass; armour
ao goi`illow-case
ao khach`Chinese-styled jacket
ao khoac`Overcoat
ao la`Undervest#Palm-leaf raincoat#leaf-dress
ao lan`Diving-suit, diving-dress
ao lot`Vest, undervest
ao mong`Fantastic dream, day-dream, castle in the air
ao mua`Waterproof, raincoat, mackintosh
ao nao`Doleful, pathetic, plaintive
ao ngu`ight-dress
ao quan`Coffin#Nhu quan ao
ao so mi`hirt
ao te`Ritual robe
ao thi`Optical illusion
ao thuat`Prestidigitation, legerdemain, jugglery
ao thung`Large-sleeved ceremonial robe
ao toi`Palm-leaf raincoat#leaf-dress
ao tran thu`Padded cotton waistcoat
ao tuong`Fancy, illusion, fantastic notion, day-dream#Mirage
ao uoc`To wish for, to long for, to crave for
ao ve sinh`Cotton sweater
ao vong`Fantastic hope, fantastic wish
ap`Full to the brim, brimful, brimfull#To press against, to stand against#To affix#To be next to, to be close to#land holding (of vassal or nobleman)#small settlement at newly-reclaimed site hamlet#to hatch, to brood, to sit, to incubate#to embrace, to hug#to rush in; to rush down#with a bang, with a crash, tumultuously
ap a ap ung`xem ap ung (lay)
ap buc`To oppress#oppression
ap chao`Half-fried, saute
ap che`To tyrannize, to persecute
ap dao`To overwhelm, to overpower
ap dat`To impose, to force on
ap dung`To apply, to put into practice, to put into application
ap giai`To escort, to conduct under escort
ap luc`Pressure
ap suat`Pressure
ap tai`To convoy
ap toi`o dash forward
ap u`to nurse, to nurture, to harbour, to cherish, to entertain
ap ung`to hum and haw, to stammer
at`Surely, certainly#To drown#the second Heaven's Stem
au`Bright and cheerful#Careless, remiss, lax#Small crock#Dockyard; shipyard#Perhaps, just#xem cu au
au ca`(cu) Sing in chorus the praises
au chau`urope
au da`To have a row, to have a dogfight
au hoa`Europeanize#To europeanize
au la`(cu) Would rather
au phuc`European clothes, European suit
au sau`Sad, melancholy
au tri`Infantile, childish
au tri vien`(cu) Kindergarten
au trung`Larva
au yem`To caress, to fondle
ay`That#Like#To thrust#Withered (noi ve co)
ay nay`(To feel) uneasy
ba`Any (trong anyone, anything, anywhere.)#To strengthen#Earldom#Chief vassal#Aunt#To embrace, to hug, to fold in one's arns#Grandmother#Madam, lady#Waste, residue, refuse#Tasteless and loose (as deprived of nutrient substance)#Exhausted, dead tired, dogtired#poisoned food#Bait, lure
ba ai`ne
ba am`o broadcast
ba ba`South Vietnamese pajamas#Trionychid turtle
ba bay`more than one, several, a variety of
ba bi`Bogey, bogy, bugbear, bugaboo#seedy, shabby, battered#unprincipled, knavish, good for nothing
ba bo`(thong tuc) Mother
ba bo mot gia`A sure thing
ba cao`To broadcast, to disseminate widely
ba chan bon cang`t full spead; as fast as one's legs could carry one
ba chang`gress
ba chi`One's elder sister#You (when adressing a woman older than oneself)#side
ba chim bay noi`he ups and downs of life
ba chu`Mistress#Suzerain, dominator
ba co`Spinster#Dead nubile girl#Termagant, scold
ba coc ba dong ba do` fixed and modest income
ba con`Relative, relation#Neighbour, fellow..
ba cot`xem cot
ba cu`ld lady; old woman
ba cung`Three "with" (live with, eat with and work with)
ba dao`Big wave, ups and downs
ba dau sau tay`Superhuman strength (ability..)
ba do`Midwife
ba do xuy`overcoat
ba dong`nhu ba cot
ba gac`tricycle, trike
ba gai`rowdy, unruly
ba gia`Mother-in-law
ba gian`tram thu ba gian Odds and ends
ba giang`Three-month growth rice
ba ho`Feudal honorary rank conferred on a village's notable or rich man#Village rich man
ba hoa`to brag, to boast, to prate, to blabber
ba hoang`Princess
ba la`Too familiar, offensively familiar, improper#three-blade
ba la mon`(ton giao) Brahman
ba lang nhang`Idle, worthless, meaningless, trashy
ba lap`isorderly#nonsensical, senseless
ba le`aris#allet
ba lo`napsack; kit-bag
ba lon`(khau ngu) nhu bong lon#Madam
ba mu`Village midwife#Goddess believed to give shape to and protect babies
ba muoi`the thirtieth day of the lunar month
ba ngay`Three days (after burial)
ba nghiep`Suzerainty
ba ngoi`(ton giao) The trinity
ba nhac`Mother-in-law
ba phai`Agreeing with everyone, without any opinion of one's own
ba phuoc`Sister, sister of charity, catholic nun
ba quan`The whole of an army (placed under a general's command)#all officials in the court
ba que`Deceitful, cheating, dishonest, tricky
ba quyen`Hegemony
ba roi`Side#Half-serious half-facetious, serio-comic
ba sinh`The three existences, eternal love
ba tanh`The people, the population
ba thang`(dia phuong) nhu ba giang
ba tieu`Banana-tree
ba tre`Grandfather's concubine#Grandaunt
ba tron`Unruly
ba tu`dia ly) Pesia
ba tuoc`earl, count
ba va`run-down, uncared-for
ba vai`Buddhist nun#Flat of the shoulder
ba vuong`Suzerain, overlord
ba xo`(dia phuong) nhu ba phuoc
ba xuan`(cu) Parents (whose merits are comparable with the three Spring months)
bac`North#To lay, to stand, to set#To span#Rush#Wick (made of rush pith or other spongy material)#Pith#North-easterly monsoon, north-easter#Silver#Piastre#Money gamble#Step, rung (of a ladder)#Grade, class, degree, level#Uncle, one's father's sister-in-law#Uncle, aunt#You old boy#to scramble#to refute, to reject, to turn down, to dismiss
bac ac`Ruthless, uncompassionate
bac ai`Humane
bac bac`Supercilious, haughty
bac ban cau`Northern hemisphere
bac be`to criticize
bac beo`Ungrateful, thankless, unrewarding
bac cau`To bridge, to fill the gap
bac co`Archaeologic
bac co thong kim`To have a wide knowledge (of things past and present), to be erudite
bac cua`Threshold (of a door)
bac cuc`North pole
bac dai`To slight, to ill-treat
bac ha`Mint, peppermint
bac hanh`ad luck; misfortune
bac hoc`Scholarly, learned#A scholarly, a learned man, a savant
bac mau`Impoverished, exhausted, overcropped
bac menh`(cu) Poor fate; unhappy hot
bac nam`North and South
bac nghia`ngrateful; thankless
bac nhac`Stringy meat
bac nhuoc`Feeble
bac phan`nhappy fate; misfortune
bac phau`Spotlessly white
bac pho`All white; snowy
bac si`Doctor, physician
bac thay`Masterly, master
bac thuoc`(tu cu, nghia cu) Chinese domination
bac tinh`Disloyal, unfaithful in love
bac vat`ngineer; erudition
bac vi tuyen`North parallel
bach`cypress; cypress-tree#Wooden skiff#Hundred; a hundred and one#white#With a thud, thuddingly#(dung de noi voi nha su) Oh, venerable bonze
bach bien`(y hoc) Vitiligo
bach bo`All-round tonic#to go for a stroll, to go for a constitutional, to go for a walk
bach cau`Leucocyte
bach chi`(thuc vat, duoc) Angelica
bach chien`Battle-tested, battle-seasoned
bach chu nien`(cu) Centenery
bach cong`(cu) nhu bach nghe
bach cuc`ommon daisy
bach cung`he white House
bach dai`Leucorrhoea, the whites
bach dan`Eucalyptus
bach dau khau`Cardamom
bach dau quan`Old men's militia
bach dinh`Village nobody
bach duong`Birch, birch-tree
bach hau`Diphtheria, diphtheritis
bach hoa`All kinds of goods#All kinds of goods
bach hop`ily
bach huyet`Lymph
bach huyet cau`Leucocyte
bach khoa`Encyclopaedic; polytechnic
bach khoa toan thu`(cu) Encyclopaedia
bach kim`Platinum
bach lap`Tallow
bach nghe`Arts and crafts
bach ngoc`iamond#par
bach nhat`Broad daylight
bach nien giai lao`o live together one hundred years old
bach phan`Centesimal, centigrade
bach phien`Heroin
bach qua`(thuc) Ginkgo
bach sinh`(Le bach sinh) (lich su) Hecatomb
bach tan`(thuc vat) Araucaria
bach tang`Albinism
bach thang`xem bach chien
bach thanh`Shrike (chim)
bach thao`All plants as a whole
bach tho`(van, cu) The Moon
bach thoai`Pekinese, Mandarin Chinese
bach thu`All animals as a whole
bach tinh`The common people, the masses
bach tuoc`Poulp, poulpe
bach tuyet`hite snow
bach yen`Serin, canary bird
bai`Bank#Expanse, ground#Paralysed, crippled#In a state of near exhaustion, almost exhausted#To fail#To be worsted, to be defeated#Tag, tablet#Card, card-game#Resort, course of action#Lesson#Trowel#Spade#To loose, to stretch#o kotow; to bow; to salute
bai bac`(khau ngu) nhu co bac#To disparage, to run down
bai ban`Ad hoc text#(khau ngu) Method
bai bao`Article
bai bay`Brazen
bai bien`Beach
bai biet`To take leave by kowtowing
bai binh`Routed troops#To cancel marching orders
bai binh bo tran`To array troops, to dispose troops in battle formation
bai binh luan`Commentary
bai bo`To abrogate, to declare null and void
bai boi`Alluvial ground; warp
bai ca`Fishing ground#ong, hymn
bai chan tha`Grazing-land, Grass-land, pasture
bai chien`(cu) Stop hostilities, cease fighting
bai cho`Hartal
bai chuc`To dismiss, to relieve of office
bai co`awn; green; grass-land
bai cong`Strike
bai dap`o answer respectfully
bai dien van`peech; address
bai giai`Key, solution
bai hat`Song
bai hoai`Degenerate, corrupt#Limp with weariness, drooping from exhaustion
bai hoc`lesson
bai khoa`School boycott#Text
bai la`Playing-card
bai lam`task, exercise, theme
bai liet`Paralyzed, crippled
bai linh`To receive with a kowtow
bai lo`To come to light, to be revealed, to be out
bai luan`ssay; composition
bai mien`To revoke the mandate of
bai muc`Section (in a syllabus)
bai nai`o desist from; to withdraw
bai nga`Ivory badge (worn by mandarins, indicating their grades)
bai ngoai`Xenophobic
bai phuc`o admire; to bow in admiration
bai quan`Routed army, routed troops
bai sa mac`esert
bai san`uined
bai ta`To thank with a kowtow
bai tap`Drilling ground#Exercise
bai tau`nrout; routed
bai tha ma`ematary; churchgard; burial ground
bai thai`Drump
bai than giao`Idolatry
bai thi`(cu) nhu bai cho
bai tho`Poem
bai thuc`Hunger-strike
bai thuoc`Remedy
bai tiet`To excrete
bai to`To make a thanksgiving to ancestors, to kowtow to the memories of ancestors#To give a kowtow, to give a salute
bai toan`(mathematical) problem
bai tran`Defeated in war
bai tri`To dispose, to arrange, to decorate
bai trieu`Recess (of court)
bai tru`To abolish, to eradicate
bai truong`Close (shut) a school (at the end of the school-year)
bai tuong`Defeated general
bai vat giao`Fetishism
bai vi`Ancestral tablet
bai vo`Class materials, task#Newspaper matter, copy
bai vong`(cu) Bow one's repect to (a king) from a distance#Defeated and wiped out
bai xich`To boycott, to ostracise
bai xuat`To excrete, to eliminate
bai yet`Respect-paying audience
bam`(cu) Mama#bluish black#(noi ve cay hoac bo phan cua cay). Fat and sappy#(it dung) Fat and firm#Plentiful#Fat (profit..)#Press, touch, feel#Cling with#Thirty#to chop; to mince#To chop up (into very small bits)#To hang on to, to stick fast to#To sponge on#To refer (to higher level)#Sir#to bite (one's lips)
bam bao`To report and refer to higher level
bam bung`To endure silently, to suppress#o reckon to oneself
bam chat`Nature, inborn trait
bam chuong`o ring the bell
bam don`To predict by thumbing one's phalanges
bam gan`To suppress one's anger silently
bam gio`To time#o tell days of good or bad omen
bam ngon`Pinch off buds (shoot) of
bam nut`Press the button
bam que`(tu cu, nghia cu) nhu bam don
bam riet`o tread on
bam sinh`Innate, inborn
bam tay`(it dung) nhu bam dot
bam tinh`isposition; innate character
bam tru`Hold on to (a military position)
bam vam`To chop up#o chop up
bam vien`Thit bam vien + Patties of minced meat
ban`Cork#Poor#Dirty, mean#Friend, fellow, comrade#Hard pressed#Flustering, pothering (because of too much work)#Mountain village#omposition#copy#Table#Testy#Time#(y hoc) Rash#Ball#(thuc vat) Bauhinia#Shift#Time#To put on, to wear#Over head and ears in, busy, engaged#Worried, causing worries#To fire, to shoot, to let off#To pry up#To sell
ban an`Dining-table#Nhu ban on#judgment, sentence
ban bac`To discuss, to deliberate, to consult, to exchange views on
ban bach`Very poor; in reduced circumstances
ban bat`Tremulous#xem bat (lay)
ban bay`(cu; it dung) nhu ban be
ban be`(cung noi) be ban Friends
ban binh nguyen`(dia ly) Peneplain
ban biu`adj & veb#(To be) busy
ban bo`To promulgate#quan ban bo The army under our (this general's) command
ban buon`Sell wholesale
ban cai`To argue, to debate
ban cao trang`harge sheet
ban cap`(y hoc) Subacute
ban cau`Hemisphere
ban chac`To sell, to trade
ban chai`Brush
ban chan`Foot
ban chat`Essence, substance, nature#to be in want
ban chieu`Afternoon; in the afternoon
ban chinh thuc`Semi-official
ban chiu`o sell on credit
ban chong`Spike-board
ban chuc`We (tieng tu xung cua quan lai)
ban co`Chessboard#Chequered board#thanh phan ban co Poor peasant and farm hand stock
ban co nong`Poor peasants and farm hands
ban cong`Balcony
ban cong khai`Semi-public, semi-official
ban cu`Old friend
ban cung`Destitude, abjectly poor#riven to extremity
ban cung hoa`Impoverish to the utmost, pauperize#Impoverish to the utmost, pauperize#To impoverish to the utmost, to pauperize#To impoverish to the utmost, to pauperize
ban cuoc`Hoeblade-shaped
ban dan`Transistorized, semi-conducting
ban dan thien ha`Everyone, everywhere
ban dao`Peninsula#This humble hermit#o hawk; to peddle
ban dap`Stirrup#Pedal, treadle#Springboard, jumping-off place
ban dau`At first; Initial
ban dau gia`Sell by auction
ban dem`y night; in the night time
ban den`Opium-tray
ban dia`Native, indigenous
ban dinh`To decide by discussion
ban do`Map
ban do hoc`Cartography
ban do luu thong`Traffic map
ban doanh`Headquarters
ban doc`Reader#Reading table#Altar
ban doi`Companion (for life), wife or husband (sharing the same life for good and for bad)
ban duc`Stereotype
ban dung`To sell someone down the river
ban duong`Fellow traveller#Fellow militant#Concomitant
ban ghe`Furniture
ban giam khao`xamining body
ban giao`To transfer, to hand over (office..)
ban giay`Writing table, desk#Office, secretariat..
ban goc`Original
ban han`Destitute
ban hang`Fellow trader#Customer
ban hanh`To promulgate, to enforce
ban hat`hant; song
ban hoan`(cu) Be anxious, be worried
ban hoc`chool-fellow; class-mate' fellow-student
ban huu`Friends
ban huyet`Anaemia
ban in`rinting#lock
ban in thu`Proof
ban ke`Inventory
ban kem`Zincograph
ban ket`Semi-final
ban khai`Half-civilized
ban khen`To felicitate, to commend, to congratulate, to praise
ban khoan`In a divided mind, in two minds
ban kich`lay; drama
ban kinh`Radius
ban la`Iron
ban lai`(cu) Original
ban lang`Mountain hamlets and villages
ban lanh`apacity; ability; fundamental; stuff
ban le`Hinge#(dung phu sau danh tu) Important connecting area#Sell (by) retail
ban linh`Skill and spirit combined, stuff
ban long`Jelly (glue) made from antlers#Sweetheart#worried; anxious
ban luan`To discuss
ban lui`Argue to refuse (to do something); argue somebody out of doing something
ban mai`Early morning
ban mang`At the risk of one's life
ban manh`To hold private discussions
ban menh`One's lot, one's fate, one's fortune
ban minh`To have menses
ban mo`(y hoc) Operating table
ban nam ban nu`isexul
ban nang`Instinct
ban nay`A little while ago, just now
ban nga`Ego, self
ban ngay`n the day-time; hyday; during the day
ban ngu`Native language, vernacular
ban nguyen am`Semi-vowel
ban nguyet`Half-circle, semi-circle
ban nguyet san`Bimonthly, fortnightly
ban nhap`Draft
ban nien`Semestrial
ban non`To sell (crops) in ears (at cheap price)
ban nong`Poor peasant, land-hungry peasant
ban on`To bestow favours, to grant a boon (a favour)
ban pha`To strafe, to bombard
ban phat`To distribute; to dispense
ban phim`Keyboard
ban phong kien`Semi-feudal
ban phu am`Semi-consonant
ban phuoc`o bless
ban quan`One's native place
ban quan su`Paramilitary
ban quyen`copyright
ban ra`Dissuade from, talk somebody out of doing something
ban rao`To cry#Ballyhoo
ban ren`(ky thuat) Srew-cutter
ban sac`Colour, character
ban sang`This morning, in the morning
ban sao`copy, duplicate
ban si`This humble scholar#nhu ban buon #(dia phuong) nhu ban le
ban so`Beginning stage, outset
ban soan`To discuss and arrange, to discuss and organize
ban son dia`half-mountain half-plain
ban tam`Intention#Worry, be worried; be disturbed
ban tan`To discuss in a widespread and inconclusive way
ban tang`This humble monk, this humble bonze#To award, to grant
ban tay`Hand
ban thach`vung nhu ban thach Rock-like, rock-steady
ban tham`(vat ly) Semi-permeable#Blotter
ban than`Bust; half-length#Haggard, worried#Intimate friend, close friend, bosom friend#Self
ban than ban than`xem ban than (lay)
ban thanh pham`Semi-finished product
ban thao`Manuscript#Sell out
ban the`Essence
ban the hoc`Ontology
ban thiu`Dirty, mean
ban tho`Altar
ban thu`(cu) Hierarhy
ban thuong`To reward, to grant a reward to, to bestow a reward on
ban tia`snipe
ban tien`Poor, poverty-stricken#ean, ignoble
ban tieng`To send word (through an intermediary)
ban tin`News-letter#o spread the news
ban tin ban nghi`o remain undecided; to be doubtful
ban tinh`Abacus#To discuss and arrange#Inherent character, innate nature#Testy; irascible
ban toa`Buttock
ban tom tat`ummary; synopsis
ban trieu`Ruling dynasty
ban tron`Round-table
ban trua`Midday, noon, at noon
ban tu dong`Semi-automatic
ban van`text
ban vang`Very dear friend, chum
ban vi`Standard#Of (relating to) departmentalism, regionalistic
ban vi chu nghia`Regionalistic
ban xoa`Plasterer's hawk
ban xoi`To leave one's native country (without hope to return)
ban xon`Sell for a clearance
ban xu`(dung phu sau danh tu) Indigenous country, native country
ban y thuc`Semi-consciousness
bang`Ascites#Bamboo pipe#Butt, rifle stock#To gore, to butt#Board#lackboard#ist, roll, table#Eagle, hero in his element#arrant, testimonial, evidence, proof#iploma, certificate, licence#Even, level#Ice#ibbon, tape, band#Malabar almond tree, Indian almond, tropical almond, almendron#Not heard from, without news#lean#State#Chinese nationals' community, Chinese colony
bang an`ell; safe
bang bac`Teem, overflow
bang ban`Even and uniform
bang bo`To dress, to dress the wounds of#To use profanities towards, to profane
bang ca`Stretcher
bang cap`Diploma
bang chan`(cung Bang chan nhu vai, binh chan nhu vai) Remain unconcerned (while others are in distress)
bang chung`Evidence, proof, exhibit
bang chuyen`Conveyor belt
bang co`Evidence, proof
bang cu`To rely on the strength of, to base oneself on
bang danh du`onour list
bang dao`nhu bang son
bang den`Blackboard
bang dia`Levelled to (with) the ground; razed
bang diem`Freezing point
bang duong`lacial ocean
bang gia`Freeze, frost
bang giao`To entertain international relations
bang ha`Glacier#to pass away
bang ha hoc`Glaciology
bang he`Collateral line
bang hieu`ign plate; shop sign
bang hoang`Stunned, stupefied
bang huu`Friends
bang huyet`(to have a) metrorrhagia
bang keo`ticking-plaster
bang khong`Otherwise, [or] else#t's a mere waste of efforts; it's just labour lost
bang khuang`Dazed with longing (grief...)
bang lang`Dusky, dim
bang long`Satisfied, content, agreeable
bang mau`Palette (of painter)
bang nao`To what extent, how
bang nguyen`Icefeil
bang nhan`First-rank doctorate second laureate (in Court feudal competition examination)#Matchmaker
bang nhang`To behave like a bumble, to fuss#nhu bang nhang
bang nhu`(tieng dia phuong) If; otherwise
bang phang`Even and flat
bang phien`Moth-ball, naphthalene
bang quan`To look on (with indifference)
bang quang`Bladder
bang quo`Vague
bang sac`Royal diplomas and certificates
bang son`ceberg
bang ta`Assistant district chief
bang tai`nhu bang chuyen
bang tam`Pure heart, crystal-clear heart
bang thinh`To listen in (class...)
bang thua`Useless, of no use; superfluous
bang tich`(ddi.a) Moraine
bang tro`To aid, to help
bang truong`hief of congrelation
bang tuyet`Ice and snow, purity
bang vai`Of the same rank
bang vang`List of successful candidates (in feudal pre-Court and Court competition exams)#Roll of honours
banh`Broad,square#Open wide with force#Cake#Howdah#Prison cell#all#To open wide; to force open#Swell
banh bach`vo bung banh bach To strike one's belly thuddingly
banh bang`Malabar almond-shaped cake
banh banh`xem banh (lay)
banh bao`Dumpling#Smart, spruce, well groomed
banh beo`Bloating fern-shaped cake
banh bich quy`nhu banh quy
banh bo`Sponge cake
banh bong`Ball-shaped cake made of popped glutinous rice grains and molasses
banh cha`Sweet meat pie in lumps
banh chay`Glutinous rice dumpling (filled with green bean paste in syrup)
banh che`Patella, knee-cap, knee-pan
banh choe`Haughty
banh chung`Square glutinous rice cake (filled with green bean paste and fat pork)
banh da`Dry pancake#Fly-wheel
banh da nem`Rice sheet (used to roll fried meat roll)
banh khao`Sweet short cake (made of roast glutinous rice flour)
banh khoai`Cake made of sweet potato meal (mixed with rice flour)#Plain rice flan
banh lai`Rudder; steering wheel
banh mat`Just awake, very early#Molasses-sweetened glutinous rice cake (filled with green bean paste or groundnut)
banh mi`Bread
banh nep`Glutinous rice cake (filled with green bean and lard)
banh ngot`Cake
banh nuong`Pie (filled with various stuff)
banh pho`Rice noodle
banh phong`Glutinous rice chupatty
banh phong tom`Glutinous rice chupatty mixed with powdered shrimp
banh que`Waffle
banh quy`Biscuit
banh ran`Glutinous rice doughnut
banh rang`Cog-wheel#bevel gear#cogwheel
banh tay`Small cylindric glutinous rice cake (filled with green bean paste and lard)
banh te`Rice cake (filled with browned onion)
banh tet`Cylindric glutinous rice cake (filled with green bean paste and fat pork)
banh to`Short overcoat, topcoat
banh tom`Crisp shrimp pastry Banh Tom is available almost everywhere in the country, but it is the best to have it at Ho Tay Restaurant on the banks of Truc Bach Lake, close to Ho Tay (West Lake). The dish should be enjoyed as soon as it reaches the table and the fried pastry topped with red shrimps eaten together with the dishes of spicy vegetables and mixed sweet and sour sauce. To remind you of the local shrimp business, waiters could tell you that the shrimps you have for your meal had just been netted from nearby Ho Tay
banh trai`Cakes (noi khai quat)#Smart and handsome
banh trang`(dia phuong) nhu banh da
banh truong`To expand, to spread
banh ve`Cake picture, fine allusion
banh voi`owdah
banh xe`xem banh
banh xeo`Rice pancake folded in half (and filled with a shrimp, meat and soya bean sprouts)
banh xop`Wafer
bao`Bold#ealthy#Panther#ewspaper, magazine#Storm, hurricane, cyclone#olic#To tell, to say#It serves one right#bag, sack#ox; packet#aist bag#support#plane#eudal court robe#To smooth with a plane
bao an`Nhu bao yen#Return a benefaction; show gratitude#To maintain law and order, to ensure security#Provincial guards, district guards
bao an binh`Guard (provincial or district)
bao anh`Phantasm#illustrated magazine
bao ban`To admonish
bao benh`Sudden grave illness
bao bi`Wrapping, packing
bao bien`To act as a Pooh-Bah
bao boc`To enclose
bao boi`Valuable thing#agic wand
bao bung`Storm, tempest
bao cao`To report; to refer#Report, account
bao cao vien`Lecturer, deliverer
bao cap`che do bao cap System of budget subsidies
bao cat`Sand-storm
bao che`To prepare medicines, to make up medicines#To screen, to shield
bao che hoc`Pharmacy, pharmaceutics
bao chi`Newspapers and magazines, periodicals, press, fourth estate
bao chiem`To appropriate
bao chinh`Tyranny
bao chua`Brutal suzerain, tyrant#To defend, to plead for, to act as counsel for
bao chung`Security, deposit
bao co`To live as a parasite, to sponge on
bao cong`To report on one's achievements
bao dam`To ensure, to guarantee, to see to#o give one's word for#o assume responsibility for
bao dan`Bold
bao danh`Poster the name list of candidates
bao dap`To requite
bao den`Nhu bao dap
bao dong`Alert, alarm#To alarm, to alert#To rise up
bao dung`generous, magnanimous
bao duong`To care for, to look after#o maintain, to keep in good repair
bao gan`Audacious
bao giay`aper bag
bao gio`When#ver
bao gioi`Press, press circles, fourth estate
bao gom`to include, to embrace, to comprise
bao hai`an bao hai ai To eat somebody out of house and home
bao ham`to imply
bao hanh`To give a warranty to#Violence
bao hao`To roat, to shout#To be on tenterhooks
bao hiem`To see to the safety#to insure
bao hieu`Signal#To show gratitude to one's parents#to give a decent funeral to one's dead parents
bao ho`To protect#o administer as a protectorate
bao hoa`Saturated#Saturated#aturated; saturant
bao hoang`Royalist
bao hy`edding announcement
bao kiem`Precious sword
bao la`immense, infinite, limitless
bao lam`Not much
bao lanh`To act as guarantee for, to answer for, to be bail for
bao linh`Act as guarantee for, answer for, be bail for
bao lon`Balcony
bao luc`Violence
bao luu`To keep in statu quo, to make reservations about
bao mat`To keep state (one's organization's) secrets
bao mau`Kindergartener, governess
bao mong`Omen in a dream
bao nghich`Rebellious
bao ngu`Abalone
bao nguoc`Wickedly cruel
bao nhieu`How much; how many#ny, any number, any amount#o much, so many
bao no`(su hoc) Patron
bao oan`o avenge; to revenge
bao on`o return thanks; to render thanks
bao phat`udden wealth
bao phoi`Audacious in deeds and words
bao phu`To wrap, to cover, to envelop
bao phuc`(tu cu, nghia cu) Revevge, avenge
bao quan`(it dung) Tyrant#(tu cu, nghia cu) Newspaper office#To maintain, to keep in good repair, to preserve, to keep in good#ondition
bao quanh`To circle, to encompass
bao quat`To embrace
bao quoc`(su hoc) Protector#(tu cu, nghia cu) Do one's duty towards one's country
bao rot`Tail of a storm
bao sanh`(Nha bao sanh) (tieng dia phuong) Maternity hospital
bao tai`Bag, jute bag
bao tan`xem tan bao
bao tang`To announce a death#to preserve in a museum
bao tang hoc`museology
bao tap`Violent storm, great upheaval, severe ordeal
bao tay`Glove
bao thai`Foetus
bao thau`To take a building contract, to bid on
bao tho`Envelope
bao thu`Conservative#To revenge oneself upon, to avenge, to take vengeance on
bao thuc`To give the alarm (wake-up signal)
bao tiep`(tu cu, nghia cu) Announce a victory
bao to`nhu bao tap
bao toan`To keep intact, to keep whole
bao ton`To preserve
bao ton bao tang`To preserve, to care for and display (historical documents, relics...), to do a conservator's work
bao tro`To sponsor, to patronize
bao trum`To cover the whole of
bao truoc`o roretell; to prediet; to forewarn
bao tu`Stomach#oetus, embryo#To notify the death of someone
bao tuyet`Snow-storm
bao ung`To get retribution for one's deed
bao vat`Precious thing, precious object
bao vay`to surround, to encircle, to blockade, to besiege, to lay a siege to
bao ve`To defend, to protect, to preserve#Guard, watchman (of an office, factory..), bodyguard
bao vu vien`Telegraphist
bao xuan`(thuc vat hoc) Primula
bao yen`To sound the all-clear (signal)
bap`Maize, Indian corn#uscle#omething shuttle-shaped#Thudding noise#To strike deep#o slide fast
bap ba bap benh`xem bap benh (lay)#xem bap benh (lay)
bap ba bap bom`xem bap bom (lay)
bap ba bap bung`xem bap bung (lay)
bap be`To babble, to prattle
bap benh`Seesaw#To bob#Unstable#ncertain#avering, staggering, unsettled#See-saw
bap bom`Defectively
bap bong`(it dung) nhu bap benh#Hobbling#luctuating
bap bung`Flickering#rescendo then diminuendo
bap cai`Cabbage
bap cay`Plough-beam
bap chan`Calf, gastrocnemius
bap co`nhu bap thit
bap dui`Thigh, vastus lateralis
bap ngo`Maize ear, corncob
bap tay`Biceps
bap thit`Muscle
bap ve`Thigh, vastus lateralis
bat`Bowl#int#ontine share#ight#Completely silent, giving no sign of life#Game of 36 cards#(thuong dung lam yeu to ghep truoc trong mot so to hop) nhu khong#To pluck#o recoil, to rebound#o spring, to burst#To seize, to catch#canvas#ymbal#ostface afterword#To buffet adrift
bat am`Octet
bat an`(it dung) Without security; unsafe#(it dung) nhu bat quyet
bat bang`Unfair, unjust, unequal
bat bao dong`Non-violence
bat be`To pick holes in someone's coat
bat bi`To impose one's terms (from one's vantage ground)
bat bien`Immutable
bat binh`nhu bat bang#issatisfied with, discontented with
bat binh dang`Unequal
bat bo`To arrest
bat buoc`To compel
bat buu`Eight weapons (for ornaments)
bat cai`Draw for the lead
bat can`Careless#Don't care
bat can thiep`Non-intervention, non-interference
bat cap`Too late, not in time#nadequate, insufficient
bat chap`In defiance of, regardless of
bat chau`Big bowl, lidless and handleless tureen
bat chet`To impose one's strict terms
bat chiet yeu`Slender-waisted bowl
bat chinh`Unrighteous, wrongful, illicit
bat chot`All of a sudden#To surprise, to notice all of a sudden
bat chung`(tu cu, nghia cu) Superhuman
bat chuoc`To ape, to imitate servilely
bat chuyen`To strike up a conversation
bat co liem si`Lost to shame#Lost to shame
bat coc`To kidnap, to hijack
bat cong`Unjust, unfair
bat cong dai thien`Mortal, deadly
bat cu`Any#Tang eight-line poetic form
bat dac chi`Disappointed, frustrated, bitter
bat dac di`Unavoidable, reluctant, grudging
bat dai`o ill-treat; to sight; to maltreat
bat dau`To start, to begin
bat den`Force compensation for
bat den xanh`Give the green lihgt
bat dia`nhu dia bat
bat diet`Indefectible, everlasting, undying
bat dinh`Unstable, unequable
bat do`Suddenly, all of a sudden, unexpectedly
bat dong`Motionless#ixed#Uneven, not simultaneous#ifferent, dissimilar
bat dong san`Real estate, real property, immovable property, immovables
bat ep`To force, to compel
bat gap`To run into, to surprise
bat giac`Octagon, octagonal shape#Suddenly, unexpectedly
bat giam`Put in prison, imprison, incarcerate, detain
bat gioi`The Eight teachnings (admonitions) of Buddha
bat giong`To give the cue to
bat hanh`Unfortunate, unlucky, poor
bat hao`Bad
bat hieu`Undutiful
bat hoa`In disagreement, at odds with each other
bat hoi`Out of breath
bat hon`nhu bat via
bat hop hien`Anti-constitutional
bat hop ly`rrational; illogical; unreasonable
bat hop phap`Illegal, illicit, illegitimate
bat hop tac`Non-cooperation
bat hop thoi`ill-timed
bat hu`Immortal
bat huong`Incense burner; joss-stick bowl
bat ke`Irrespective of, regardless of
bat kha tri`thuyet bat kha tri Agnosticism
bat kham`Restive
bat khuat`Undaunted, unyielding, indomitable
bat lich su`Discourteous, rude, indecorous
bat linh`Circonscript by force, press-gang
bat loi`Adverse, unfavourable#Incriminate, bring a charge against
bat lua`Cigarette-lighter
bat luan`Any
bat luc`Powerless, helpless, impotent
bat luong`Dishonest
bat ly than`Inseparable
bat mach`To feel the pulse
bat man`(To be) dissatisfied with, (to be) discontented with#(to be) dissatisfied with life in the old society
bat mang`Devil-may-care, reckless
bat mau`China bowl (with a certain design)
bat minh`Dubious, shady
bat nat`To bully
bat net`To break in by finically and strictly finding fault with
bat ngan`Innumerable and extensive
bat ngat`Vast, immense, limitless
bat nghia`Disloyal
bat ngo`Sudden, unexpected, unforeseen
bat nha`Rude, impolite
bat nhan`Compassionate, pitying#ather ruthless, rather heartless#Inhumane, unfeeling
bat nhao`Topsyturvy, higgledy-piggledy
bat nhat`Any day in the future, any coming day impossible to fix#Inconsistent
bat nhu y`Not according to one's wish, not to one's liking
bat nhuoc`Would rather
bat no`To seize debtor's property (in payment or in attempt to speed up payment)
bat non`To pretend to be in the know (to frighten sb into telling the truth)
bat pham`Civilian-eight-mandarin grade
bat phat`o fine; to punish
bat pho`To loiter in the streets
bat phu`(tu cu, nghia cu) Recruit coolies by force
bat phuong trinh`(toan) Inequation
bat qua`At most
bat quai`Eight-sign figure
bat quyet`To exorcize by clasping hands
bat re`to take root#o pick out and train into a stalwart supporter
bat sach`Name of a playing-card
bat song`Capture alive
bat tai`Incapable#To box someone's ear
bat tam`Without sending back any news
bat tan`Unending
bat tat`Unnecessary, needless
bat tay`To shake hands#o join hands with#o set to
bat te`nhu bat mang
bat tham`To draw lots
bat thiep`Courteous, urbane, well-mannered#Urbane, well-mannered
bat thop`To see the cloven hoof of, to know the ulterior motive of
bat thuan`Unfavourable
bat thuong`Unusual, extraordinary, special#hangeable
bat tien`Not convenient, inconvenient, out of place#The eight fairies
bat tin`Newsless
bat tinh`Unconscious, insensible
bat toi`To inflict punishment on
bat trac`Unlucky#Knavish (noi ve nguoi)
bat tran`Eight precious dishes
bat treo`To cross
bat tri`Incurable#nruly, refractory
bat trung`Disloyal, unfaithful
bat tu`Immortal#ash, reckless#ll of a sudden#nhu bat mang
bat tuan`Eight years (of age)
bat tuc`Insufficient
bat tuong`Ill-omened, ominous
bat tuong xam`(Hiep uoc bat tuong xam) Treaty of non reciprocan aggression
bat tuyet`Unending
bat va`To inflict a fine on (somebody formerly for contravening village or family conventions)
bat via`Frightened out of one's wits
bat xam pham`(Hiep uoc bat xam pham) Treaty of non-aggression
bat y`Heedless, careless, negligent
bau`Door-sill#You, thou (tieng goi vo hay nguoi yeu gai)#To alight (chim), to swarm over (ruoi.)#Gourd#vary#reastful#Pool, pond (in the fields)#Precious, valuable#To hold fast to with one's fingers#o pinch#o nip off#To swarm round, to swarm over#o crowd about, to mob#Collar (of jacket)#ocket (of jacket)
bau ban`(mia) To elect#Friends
bau bau`(noi ve ve mat) Sagging (with sulks)#Frowning, scowling
bau bi`Cucurbit
bau binh`Plump, chubby
bau cu`Election, vote
bau doan`Retinue (ham y coi khinh)
bau duc`Kidney (of animals raised for meat)#(dung phu sau danh tu) Kidney-shaped, elliptical, oval
bau giac`Suction cup
bau nhau`Grumble, growl
bau ruou`ine-gourd
bau tam su`eart
bau troi`Vault of heaven, firmament
bau vat`recious thing
bau veo`To nip off little by little (in a brazen way)
bau viu`To hold fast to#o lean on (when in distress)
bay`(it dung; ket hop han che) Brazen#Brazen#rong, nonsensical, improper#Flock, herd#ang, band#Tender, immature, green#eltingly soft, pulpy#So much#hen#To display, to show#o reveal, to confide#o contrive, to devise#To fly#o fade, to go#o fail (in an examination)#To prize#Trap, snare, pitfall#To trap, to snare, to ensnare, to entrap#even, seventh
bay ba`Meltingly soft#nhu bay
bay bay`violently
bay bien`Like blazes, like hell#To arrange#o indulge in superfluities
bay bong`Fly very high#igh-faluting
bay buom`polished, flowery, refined
bay chay`For long, since long, ever since
bay chu`(tu cu, nghia cu hoac tieng dia phuong) nhu bay gio#Then
bay chuyen`Fly from... to.#Make up stories, cook up stories
bay co ke`Dog trap
bay dai`That long
bay dat`To create (unnecessary things)
bay gio`Now, right now#Then, that time
bay hay`irty
bay hoi`to evaporate
bay la`Fly very low
bay lau`For so long, since that long
bay len`o fly away; to fly off
bay luon`hover (of a bird); glide (of an aeroplane)
bay mau`Fade
bay mui`Lose perfume
bay nay`From then till now
bay nhay`Slimy#oft but leathery#rresolute, dillying-dallying#To fly high
bay nhieu`So much, that much#That much, that many
bay to`To make clear, to express
bay toi`xem be toi
bay tro`Complicate matters
bay vai`Equal, counterpart
bay ve`To contrive (unnecessary things), to conceive (impractical things), to go to unnecessary lengths#o show
be`Bellows#Calf#To carry#o interlard#Feeling ashamed, put to the blush#Ocrea#aize, Indian corn#Platform, pedestal, dais#To interlard integrally#Raft#loating garden#lique#art (in a musical composition for many instruments, voices...)#Chunky, squat#Side, dimension#espect; aspect#Small, little, tiny#Secondary (noi ve nguoi vo)#Soft, low (noi ve am thanh)#To break#o fold#o pinion#o refute#To hold (in one's arms)#Wine flask#Beige#To build mud embankments on#o surround with hands top of heaped vessel (to secure the fullest measure)#nhu bien#ank#To break
be ai`Sea of passion, love
be bai`To find fault with, to carp at
be ban`nhu ban be
be bang`Feeling ashamed, feeling awkward
be be`Bleat (of a goat)#Plentiful#Smallish#xem be nghia 2
be bet`Crushed to pulp#n a complete mess#Smeared all over, splashed all over#t a standstill, stagnant
be boi`In a pother, in a stew#Swimming pool
be bon`Jumbled, in a jumble
be bong`Little and tender
be can`Water tank
be canh`Clique, confederacy
be cao`Height
be con`Little child
be dai`Length#Little and inexperienced
be dang`Clique, set, faction
be dau`Beach turned into a mulberry field, vicissitudes, whirligig
be doc`Length
be doi`(nhac) Duo
be ghi`To handle a switch, to switch
be giang`To end a term, to end a school-year
be ha`Your Majesty
be hoan`Mandarin life (with its ups and downs)
be hoe`Split hairs, find fault with
be kho`Wordly life full of miseries, valley of tears
be khuc`To crack one's knuckles
be kien`To attend an audience given by the sovereign
be lai`To steer
be lu`Clique, gang
be mac`To close, to end, to wind up (noi ve hoi nghi, khoa hop...)
be mat`Area, surface#xem be
be mieng`Not powerful enough to make oneself hear, powerless, without authority
be mon`Of a socially humble position
be ngang`Breadth, width
be ngoai`Exterior, outward
be ngoc`nhu be rong
be nhe`nhu le nhe
be nho`Little, small
be phai`Faction
be phong`Ramp
be quan toa cang`(Chinh sach be quan toa cang) The closed-door policy#chinh sach be quan toa cang The closed-door policy
be rac`Slovenly, slipshod Squalid
be rong`Canopied dais, the throne
be sau`Depth
be tac`In an impasse, in a stalemate, at a standstill
be tha`To plunge into dissipation, to wallow in debauchery#Shabby
be the`Influence (deriving from a high position)#reat size, magnitude, great dimensions#Influential#izeable
be ti`(Gun) support#Very small, tiny#very small; tiny; minute
be toi`Subject, vassal
be tre`To leave undone, to neglect
be tren`Superior
be ve`Imposing, stately
be vun`o crumb; to crumble
bech`Chalky, sickly white
bem`Glib, glibtongued#Secret
bem mep`xem bem
ben`Groin#River watering place#anding stage, wharf, station#Sharp#To touch, to set#o catch#Side, edge, face#Strong, solid, fast, long-wearing#nduring, long-lasting#Then#To plait#o entangle
ben bet`Flattish
ben bi`Defendant#Enduring
ben canh`Near, next to, nearby, adjacent#ide by side#o
ben chat`Steadfast
ben chi`Persevering, patient
ben co`(kinh te) Creditor; cerdit
ben do`port; station
ben duoi`Under, below#ower, inferior
ben gan`Tenacious, Steady
ben hoi`Take a fancy to, take to
ben len`Bashful, self-conscious, shy
ben loi`Ford
ben mang`To come near
ben mau`Of fast colour
ben mui`To grow accustomed to, to become attached to
ben ngoai`Exterior#utside, outdoors, out of doors; in the open#Maternel, on the distaff side
ben nguyen`Plaintiff
ben no`(kinh te) Debtor; debit
ben nuoc`River wharf, river watering place
ben pha`ferry
ben tau`Wharf#inor port
ben tren`over, above#pper, uppermost
ben trong`Interior#ithin, inside
ben vung`Unshakeable
ben xe`car-park; parking place
beng`Then and there#lean#To cut, to cut off#Topsy-turvy, pell-mell
benh`Disease, illness, sickness#rouble (in a machine)#To prize up#o tilt#o take sides with#To surge up, to emerge
benh bech`Sickly whitish, sickly pale
benh binh`Sick soldier, man on the sick list
benh bong`xem bong benh
benh can hoc`(y hoc) Aetiology
benh chung`Symptom
benh hoan`Illness, sickliness#Diseased, unhealthy, sickly
benh nhan`Patient
benh tat`Disease (noi khai quat)#iseased, sickly
benh vien`Hospital
benh vuc`To uphold (the cause of), to support, to defend, to champion
beo`(dia phuong) nhu veo Pinch#Fat#reasy#Making rich#Panther#Scraggy#To pinch#Water-fern
beo Nhat Ban`Water hyacinth
beo Tay`nhu beo Nhat Ban
beo beo`Fattish
beo beu`Flabbily fat
beo bo`Profitable, fat
beo bot`Water-fern nad foam; flotsam and jetsa
beo cai`Pistia
beo cam`Wolffia
beo dau`Azolla
beo i`Flabbily fat
beo lan`Muscular, corpulent#Stout
beo leo`Glib
beo mam`Fatty
beo map`Stout, plump
beo mat`ngu cho beo mat To sleep to one's heart's content
beo mo`(tieng ma'ng) Pranky prankish, prankful, frolicsome
beo ngay`Greasy
beo nheo`Flabby, flaccid
beo ong`Floating moss
beo quay`Tubby
beo tam`Duckweed
bep`Cooking-stove, cooking range#ooking fire#itchen, cook-house#ale cook#ousehold#eudal soldier#rivate first class#Flat, crushed#rostrate, knocked down
bep nuc`Cook-house, kitchen (noi khai quat)
bep nuoc`Cooking
bep rum`(cung viet bep dum) Flattened, deformed
bep tai`dan bep tai Opium addicts
bep xep`To tell tales
bet`At the bottom of the scale, least, last, lowest, worst#dung phu sau dong tu hoac tinh tu) Utterly wrong..#Flop#Flat#longated#To stick#Dog-tired, exhausted#ad, inferior#adv#lat, plump
bet be`(it dung) nhu be bet
bet nhe`(khau ngu) Having a drawl from overdrinking#Having a drawl from overdrinking
bet ra`At [the] least
beu`Flabby#To display, to expose to shame
beu beu`Rather flabby
beu dieu`xem beu rieu
beu nang`To go bare-headed in the sun
beu rech`Slovenly, slipshod, squalid
beu rieu`To expose to shame, to expose to ridicule, to pillory
beu xau`Dishonuor, discredit, humiliate
bi`Marble#all#Tragic#Pumpkin#Close, stuffy#n a fix, in a stalemate, hard-pressed#Skin#To slight, to despise#Unlucky, unfortunate#sack; bag#To be, -ed#o be subjected to, to be victim of
bi ai`Woeful
bi an`Enigmatic, mysterious
bi ba bi bo`xem bi bo (lay)
bi ba bi bom`With much plashing noise
bi bach`With a smack
bi bang`(it dung) nhu phi bang
bi beng`Topsy-turvy
bi bet`Backward, lagging behind
bi bi`xem bi nghia 4 (lay)
bi bo`To lisp
bi bom`With a plashing noise, plashingly
bi bop`Flop, plop
bi ca`Elegy
bi cam`Moving, touching
bi can`Accused (dang bi xet hoi)
bi cao`Indictee (dang bi xu)
bi chi`Epitaph
bi chu`To annotate
bi dai`Urine retention
bi danh`Alias, code name
bi dat`Lamentable
bi dong`Passive, on the defensive#Soldier's water-bottle, canteen
bi gay`Sack and stick, beggar
bi hai kich`Tragi-comedy
bi hiem`Unscrutable, unfathomable
bi hung`nhu bi trang
bi khuc`Elegy
bi kich`Tragedy
bi lua`o be tricked; swindled
bi mat`Scorn, despise#Secrret; cladestine#ecret
bi nhan`This humble student (writer...)
bi oi`Vile, base, despicable
bi phu`(cu) Skin
bi quan`pessimistic
bi quyet`Secret, knack, trick#ecisive factor, key
bi si`Down in the mouth, sagging with dissatisfaction#Taciturn, of few words
bi tham`Tragic
bi thiet`Doleful
bi thit`(thong tuc) Lubber, dolt; good-for-nothing
bi thu`(communist) Secretary#rivate secretary#Envelope#To compare with one another
bi thuong`Sorrowful#Wounded
bi ti`Dead drunk
bi tien`(cu) Leather whip
bi trang`Woeful and majestic at the same time
bi tri`Ruled, oppressed
bi truyen`Secretly handed down, esoteric
bi van`ad luck; misfortune
bi vo`(cu) Burglar
bi vong luc`Memorandum (ngoai giao)
bia`Cover (of books)#oard#lab, outside board#lab#dge#To invent, to fabricate#eer; ale#tele
bia dat`To fabricate, to trump up
bia mieng`Posthumous ill fame
bich`Bluish green#Cylindric bamboo tank, basket#To flop with a thudding noise#o hit hard
bich bao`Wall-newspaper
bich chuong`oster
bich hoa`Wall-painting, rock-painting
bich ngoc`Emerald
biec`Bluish green
biem`o crab; to damn
biem hoa`Cartoon
bien`(thuong di voi thanh) To change into, to turn into#o vanish, to vanish without leaving a trace#Floodplain, floodland (o ven song)#Sea#scutcheon (do vua ban)#ignboard, poster, plate, post#To jot down#o write#Edge, selvedge, list, line#To prepare#o invoke
bien ai`Border gate
bien am`Phonetic variant
bien ap`nhu bien the
bien bac`To reason, to argue
bien bach`To justify, to vindicate, to defend
bien ban`Report, minutes, proces-verbal
bien bao`(cu) Retort
bien biet`(di bien biet) to leave behind no traces whatsoever
bien ca`High sea
bien cach`Declension
bien cam`(dien) Variometer
bien canh`(cu) nhu bien gioi
bien chat`To degenerate#Degenerate
bien che`To organize the staff of#Personnel, staff
bien chep`To jot down, to keep (noi khai quat)
bien chung`Complication, side-effect#To produce a complication, to produce a side-effect#Dialectic (-al)
bien chung phap`Dialectics
bien chuyen`Change
bien co`Upheaval, major change
bien cuong`Border area
bien dang`To deform#Variant, variation#eformation
bien dao`Bien dao mua#horeographer
bien di`Variability (o sinh vat)
bien dich`To translate
bien dien`Develop
bien do`Amplitude
bien doi`Flight (of fighting planes)#To change,to alter
bien dong`To vary, to evolve, to change
bien giai`Explain, reason
bien gioi`Frontier
bien hinh`Metamorphosis#ransformation
bien ho`To defend, to act as counsel for, to act as apologist for
bien hoa`To transform, to evolve#Versatile, multiform#Transform, evolve#ersatile, multiform
bien khoi`Main sea
bien khu`Border area
bien lai`Receipt
bien lan`Greedy and stingy
bien loan`Disturbance, turmoil
bien luan`To reason, to argue#o discuss
bien minh`o justfly to enucleate
bien ngoi`(ngon ngu) Conjugate
bien nhan`Receipt
bien nhiet`(sinh hoc) Poikilothermic
bien nien`Annalistic
bien phan`(toan) Variation
bien phap`Measure, means, method
bien phong`To defend the country's border
bien sac`To change colour
bien soan`To compile, to write
bien tap`nhu bien soan#o edit
bien tap vien`Publisher's reader
bien tau`Variation
bien thai`Metamorphosis (cua sau bo)
bien the`Transformer#Variant
bien thien`To vary#Upheaval, major change
bien thu`To embezzle
bien thuy`(cu; van chuong) nhu bien cuong
bien thuyet`(tu cu, nghia cu) Argue, reason
bien tien`(dia ly) Marine transgression
bien tinh`Denatured
bien to`(ngon ngu) Flexion
bien tro`Rheostat
bien tuong`Disguise#Disguised
bien uy`Editorial staff
bieng`Disinclined, losing interest in
bieng an`(Chung bien an) (y) Anorexia
bieng biec`xem biec (lay)
bieng choi`Be slightly ill (said of children)
bieng nhac`Lazy, idle
biet`To know, to realize#To part with, to leave#dung phu sau dong tu) To leave behind no traces at all
biet bao`(dung truoc danh tu, hoac sau tinh tu) How much, how many, how
biet bung`Understand somebody's feelings
biet chung`Know [in advance] what is to be done#(biet chung nao (dung sau tt, thuong trong cau cam xuc)) How very
biet chung nao`(dung sau tinh tu, trong cau cam xuc) How very
biet dai`To treat with favour, to treat with high consideration
biet danh`Nickname, alias
biet dau`(dung o dau cau, hoac dau doan cau) No one knows
biet dau chung`May be, perhaps
biet dieu`Reasonable, judicious, sensible
biet dong doi`Special task force
biet duoc`Patent medicine, proprietary medicine
biet duong nao`nhu biet chung nao
biet hieu`Pen name
biet kich`Commando, ranger#To spring a surprise attack
biet lap`To stand aloof, to stand isolated
biet ly`eparated
biet may`nhu biet chung nao
biet mui`Take a liking to; have a taste of, have an experience of
biet ngu`Jargon
biet nhan`Special esteem, high esteem
biet on`Thankful, grateful
biet phai`To second#Sectarian
biet so`(toan) Discriminant
biet tai`Special talent, special talent for#Specially gifted
biet tam`Gone without (leaving) a trace
biet tay`To know what stuff one is made of
biet than`To serve one right#o be conscious of one's inferiority
biet the`If you know it
biet thi`Hold in high (special) regards
biet thu`Villa
biet thuc`(toan) Discriminant
biet tich`Gone without leaving a single trace
biet tin`Without news, without tidings
biet xu`(Deported) far away from one's country
biet y`To guess someone's intentions
bieu`Table, index#etition to the king, letter to the king#nhu bao#To present
bieu bi`Epidermis
bieu cam`Expressive
bieu dat`To express, to denote
bieu dien`Perform, execute#toan, ly) Represent#To perform, to execute#o represent
bieu do`Graph, diagram
bieu dong tinh`To show one's approval, to show one's support
bieu duong`To show, to display
bieu hien`To manifest, to manifest itself, to show plainly#o depict (with artistic means)#Manifestation
bieu kien`Apparent
bieu lo`To reveal, to betray (tu tuong, tinh cam...)
bieu mo`(sinh hoc) Epithelium
bieu ngu`Banner
bieu quyet`To vote
bieu sinh`(sinh hoc) Epigeneous, epigenous
bieu thi`To show, to display
bieu thuc`Expression
bieu tinh`To demonstrate
bieu tuong`Symbol#epresentation
bieu xen`To give, to present
bim`Pigtail, plait of hair#nhu bim bim
bim bim`Bindweed
bim bip`Boucal
bim toc`raid; plait
bin rin`To be loath to part with
binh`(thong tuc) Shit (said of children)#(tieng dia phuong) nhu benh#Soldier, army#nhu benh#The third Heaven's Stem#(noi ve quan ao, giay dep)+Borrowed#Vase, pot, china decanter#essel, container#To declaim, to recite
binh an`nhu binh yen
binh ban`(nhac) An adagio tune (in Southern Vietnam)
binh bau`To select through discussion
binh bi`Armament
binh bich`dam binh bich vao qua bong To hit a ball with a series of thudding blows#Motor-bike
binh bien`Mutiny
binh bo`(tu cu, nghia cu) Ministy of war
binh bong`Ding-dong#Flotsam-like
binh boong`Ding-dong
binh but`Writer, journalist
binh can`ause of illness
binh cau`Flask (dung trong phong thi nghiem)
binh chan`Unruffled, unconcerned, indifferent
binh chu`To comment on and gloss
binh chung`Arm#ymptom; sign of illness
binh co`(tu cu, nghia cu) Strategy
binh cong`To assess through discussion the achievements of (members of a community)
binh cong xuong`Arms workshop
binh dan`Commoner#popular 
binh dang`Equal
binh dao`Fire and sword
binh di`Ordinary and simple
binh dia`Level ground
binh dich`(tu cu, nghia cu) Military service#lague; epidemic
binh dien`Battery, small-size dynamo
binh dinh`To pacify, to quell
binh do`Level#eight, altitude
binh doan`Multi-battalion (multi-regiment, multi-division, multi-army), corps (unit)
binh gia`Military#To appraise through a discussion#o review
binh hanh`Hinh binh hanh A parallelogram
binh hoa`(tu cu, nghia cu) Scourge of war#(tu cu, nghia cu, van chuong) nhu binh lua
binh hoc`athology
binh huong`Censer, incense-burner
binh khang`Xom binh khang The licenced quarters
binh khi`Weapons
binh kho`(tu cu, nghia cu) Arms depot, military depot
binh lang`Quiet#uiet and peaceful
binh linh`Soldier, troops (noi khai quat)
binh luan`To comment on
binh luc`Combat force, combat troops
binh luu`(khtuong) Advection
binh ma`Troops and horses, military force
binh minh`Dawn
binh nghi`To assess through discussion
binh ngu`(tu cu, nghia cu) Diffrent arms (of an army)
binh nguyen`Plain
binh nhan`atient; sick-person
binh nhat`First class private#danh tu (dung lam phan phu trong cau)#veryday
binh nhi`Private
binh nhu`Army ordnance, military supplies
binh on`To stabilize
binh pham`To comment on, to make a judgment on
binh phap`Art of warfare
binh phi`Military spending
binh phong`(tieng dia phuong) Spitton#Screen
binh phuc`To be well again, to regain health, to recover#Uniform
binh phuong`noun, verb#quare
binh quan`Average
binh quyen`Enjoying equal rights#Military power
binh si`Soldiers, men, troops
binh sinh`danh tu (dung lam phan phu trong cau)#ifetime
binh tam`Calm, cool-headed
binh than`Quiet, uneventful#alm, unruffled
binh thu`Book on warfare
binh thuong`Ordinary, usual, normal, indifferent#dung lam phan phu trong cau) Everyday
binh thuong hoa`To restore to normal, to normalize
binh thuy`Thermos flask, thermos bottle
binh thuyen`(tu cu, nghia cu) Warship
binh tich`China teapot
binh tinh`(tu cu, nghia cu) Frankly, fairly#Calm, cool, unruffled, selfpossessed#Military situation, army condition#ituation
binh tri`(tu cu, nghia cu) Govern in peace, rule in peace
binh tuoi`Watering-can
binh van`To carry out agitation and propaganda among enemy troops
binh vien`linic; hospital
binh voi`Pot of slaked lime
binh vu`(tu cu, nghia cu) Military affairs
binh xa`ispensary; infirmary
binh xuong`rsenal
binh yen`Safe and sound, in security and good health
bip`To cheat, to swindle
bip bom`Dishonest, tricky
bit`To stop#o rim, to crown#To stop, to block, to seal
bit bung`Shut up, completely close
bit mat`Blindfold#ool, cheat
bit mieng`Gag
bit tat`Socks, stockings
bit tat tay`Gloves
biu`Bursha#To grasp#To purse, to pout
biu dai`Scrotum
biu diu`Wrapped up in
biu moi`o purse one's lips; to curl up one's lips
bo`(cu, hoac dia phuong; dung truoc danh tu) Hey#Appearance, look, carriage, gait#apability (ham y coi thuong)#et#Butter#Cold#Chamber-pot#Dad, papa#nsect#aggot#Father, papa, dad#ute#anvas#khau ngu) Love#Old man-servant#eadle, verger#(To be) worth the trouble, to compensate, to meet one's wish#Ox, cow; beef#Shore, bank#edge, fence, wall#im, edge#Sweetheart, lover#amboo basket#To put, to place#To strike blows (bang dao, bua, cuoc...), to cleave, to split#o cut into segments (qua cay)#o rush headlong, to plunge headlong#o apportion#o flatter#o tie; to bind; to faggot; to bunch#aggot; bunch; bundle#riable; crumbly; profitable
bo ba`Coarse#noi ve bua an, thuc an) Abundant but coarse#Trio#nhu bo me
bo bac`Silver worm, lepisma
bo bang`Give up for a long time, clean omit, clean drop
bo be`To neglect#nhu bo be
bo ben`Shore and port, coast, limit of big lakes (rivers...) and main land#tinh tu, dong tu#(To be) worthwhile#(To be) adequate, (to be) sufficient
bo bich`Bamboo baskets and other rice containers
bo bien`eashore; seaside; seacoast
bo binh`Infantry, foot-soldier
bo bo`Job's tears#Close, griping#tick-in-the-mud#Loudly and openly#nhu bo me
bo bot`Reduse, cut down
bo bua`Bewitch, charm, cast a spell on (over)#Leave in desorder, leave in a terrible mess
bo bui`Hedge and bush, thick bush (noi khai quat)
bo buoc`o oblige; to bind; to put under constraint
bo cac`(tieng dia phuong) Magpie (chim)
bo cai`(tu cu, nghia cu) Father and mother, parents
bo canh`(thong tuc) Sunday clothes, Sunday best
bo cao`(tu cu, nghia cu) Proclaim#Rake
bo cap`Scorpion#nhu bo cap
bo cat`Sparrow-hawk
bo cau`Pigeon, dove
bo cha`nhu bo me
bo chanh`nhu bo chinh
bo chao`Spectacled laughing thrush
bo chay`Run away, run for dear life
bo chet`Flea
bo chi huy`nhu bo tu lenh
bo chinh`Feudal provincial mandarin in charge of tax and financial affairs#To revise
bo chinh tri`Politburo
bo cho`Tick
bo chung`Flat on one's back
bo coi`Frontier, border#erritory, country#nhu mo coi
bo con gian`o satisfy one's anger
bo cong`Be worth troubling about, be worth one's while
bo cong anh`Dandelion
bo cu`(form of addressing a) Peasant with a son as first child
bo cuc`Arrangement, lay-out#To arrange, to lay out (mot tac pham nghe thuat)
bo cui`Click beetle
bo cuu`To amend
bo dai`(tu cu, nghia cu) Cornet (for ice-cream...)#Bull
bo dam`(May bo dam) Walkie-talkie
bo dang`Bearing and figure (noi khai quat)
bo de`Lemma#Snowbell, styrax#cua bo de Buddhist shrines (in relation with Buddhist believers)#am; dike; dyke
bo di`(form of addressing a) Peasant with a daughter as first child#leave, go off
bo dieu`(co hoc) Synchronize#Bearing carriage#khau ngu) To put on airs
bo do`Leave unfinished#Suit#et
bo doi`(Communist) Soldier, military#nhu bo me#o famish
bo dua`Stag beetle
bo dung`To appoint, to name
bo duong`Help recover one's health (with good care and nutrition)
bo gay`Mosquito larva
bo ghet`Give vent to one's dislike
bo gia`(khau ngu) Love#nhu bo
bo giau`Hedge
bo goi`hinh anh) to be unable to do
bo ha`Subordinate
bo hanh`Pedestrian#To walk
bo he`Pavement, side-walk
bo hinh`(tu cu, nghia cu) Ministry of Justice
bo ho`(tu cu, nghia cu) Ministry of Finance
bo hoa`Leave (land) fallow
bo hoang`Leave (land) uncultivated
bo hoc`(tu cu, nghia cu) Ministry of Education#Give up one's study, break off one's study, drop out
bo hon`Soapberry (-tree)
bo hong`Soot
bo hung`Dor-beetle
bo ich`Useful, helpful
bo kep`Australian locust
bo khong`Idle, unused
bo khuyet`To complement
bo kinh`(tu cu, nghia cu) One's lawful and virtuous wife
bo lac`Tribe
bo lai`(tu cu, nghia cu) Ministry of the Interior
bo lao`Cheeky#onsensical#Elder, notable
bo le`(tu cu, nghia cu) Ministry of Rites
bo leu`nhu bo lao
bo lieu`Sedge and willow; the weaker sex#To let things go their own way, to abandon
bo lo`Barbecue#Miss
bo long`Coat, fur, plumage, feathers#Tripes (bo); entrails (lon)
bo lu dong`Lumber-jacket
bo lua`heaf of corn
bo lung`Leave unfinished, leave half-done
bo mac`To abandon
bo mang`To pop off (ham y khinh)
bo mat`Air, look, face#Lose, miss
bo may`Apparatus, machine#ystem
bo me`To death#amn it! Damn, damned#arents
bo minh`To lay down one's life
bo mon`Subject, genre (khoa hoc nghe thuat...)#hair
bo mong`Bull
bo mua`To leave over
bo nao`Brain
bo nghia`(ngon ngu hoc) Modify
bo ngo`Leave (a door...) open,leave unclosed#o feel strange; to surprise
bo ngu`Complement#Desert
bo ngua`Mantis
bo nhao`To dive, to rush headlong, to plunge headlong#To run helter-skelter in various directions
bo nhiem`To appoint, to designate
bo nhin`uppet
bo nho`Memory (of a computer)#To make a passing shot
bo nhoai`Full length
bo nong`Pelican
bo nuoi`Foster-father
bo oc`Brain
bo ong`Put money in a bamboo pipe savings bank
bo phan`Part#Partial
bo phi`Waste
bo phieu`To go to the polls
bo pho`Dishevelled, ruffled#aggard
bo phong`To take defence measures
bo phuou`(khau ngu) Joker, wag
bo qua`To let slip, to miss#o let pass unnoticed#o bypass#To pardon, to forgive
bo quan`Flacourtia
bo quen`Forget, leave
bo rao`Hedge, fence
bo rap`Round up
bo ray`ay-bug
bo re`At the lowest
bo ro`To make light of, to make mincement of
bo roi`To leave far behind#o let down
bo sach`et of books
bo sat`Reptile
bo sau`Set#and, gang
bo siet`Be stingy
bo song`iver bank
bo sot`Omit, miss out
bo sung`To supplement
bo tat`Bodhisattva#Potass#otassium salt
bo tham`nhu bo phieu
bo tham muu`Staff
bo than`o deprive oneself of liberty
bo thau`To tender
bo thay`nhu bo xac
bo thi`To give as alms, to give as charities#o give, to hand out
bo tho`Dazed, as if out of one's senses
bo thong`Hang down, hang loose
bo thua`Field dam
bo thuoc`(tu cu, nghia cu) Surbordinate
bo tich`nhu bo dieu
bo tot`Gayal
bo tran`(tu cu, nghia cu) Dispose troops in battle-array
bo tri`To arrange, to lay
bo triet am`(ky) Silencer
bo tro`To supplement
bo tron`o decamp; to bolt; to run away
bo truong`Minister
bo tu`To put in jail, to throw in prison
bo tu lenh`Command
bo tuc`To give a refresher course to, to give continuation education to
bo tui`Pocket#dung phu sau danh tu, trong mot so to hop) Pocket-size
bo tuong`Feudal lower-ranking general
bo u`Zebu
bo vay`(tieng dia phuong) nhu bua vay
bo ve`Leave, quit
bo vo`Lonely, desolate#To pretend, to geign, to sham
bo von`Invest, put money in
bo vung`Multifield dam
bo xa`Musk-ox#distance, outdistance
bo xac`To pop off (ham y khinh)
bo xit`Stink bug
bo xo`To lay up (in a napkin)#dung phu sau danh tu) Worthless, cast off
bo xu`nhu bo me#o fly one's country
bo xuyet`(tu cu, nghia cu) Revise and update
boc`Bundle#mniotic sac, womb#To cover#o enclose, to surround#To pick up in one's hands, to scoop up with one's hands#o make up (mot don thuoc bac)#o draw (la bai, que tham)#o peel ; to skin; to husk
boc bach`To bare
boc chay`To burn up, to burst into flames
boc do`To load and unload
boc dong`(khau ngu) To act like a hothead, to be hotheaded
boc hau`In the rear
boc hoa`To get hot in the face, to get hot in the head (theo quan niem dong y)#o flash out (in anger)
boc hoi`To evaporate
boc khoi`o smoke
boc lo`To expose, to bare, to show
boc loi`(tu cu, nghia cu) Dynamite
boc lot`o sweat, to rob; to plunder
boc ma`nhu boc mo
boc mo`To exhume and move (hai cot) to another place
boc mui`Give out a smell; smell
boc pha`Explosive charge#To blow up (with an explosive charge)
boc phat`xplode; to break out suddenly
boc roi`To behave profligately
boc sat`Armoured
boc thuoc`Make up (a prescription)
boc truc`Free spoken, blunt
boc tuech`Ingenuous
boc tuech boc toac`xem boc tuech (lay)
boc vac`To load and unload by hand
boc vay`o des+uamate
boi`To apply (a thin layer of)#o do perfunctorily, to do by halves#o contrive (cai khong can thiet)#o erase, to rub out(bang dden)#To dig up, to scratch up#o pick holes in (someone's coat)#o abuse, to call (someone's) bad name#To swim#o row#o struggle#Twigs mixed with grass (dung de ddun)#haff#Waiter (khach san), man-servant (nha rieng bon thuc dan), houseboy#o divine; to foretell; to angur#xem hat boi#To break, to act counter to#Multifold, greater#Multiple#xem roi boi#xem trong boi#y; because of
boi bac`To smear, to stain (noi khai quat)#o perform carelessly, to do by halves#Ungrateful, thankless
boi ban`o blur
boi bep`Male servants (noi khai quat)
boi bo`To strengthen, to foster, to increase
boi boi`Profuse
boi buom`Butterfly (stroke)
boi but`Hack writer, hack publicist
boi ca`ingfisher
boi canh`Setting, background
boi cheo`Oar, paddle
boi chi`Overspending (qua muc du tru cua ngan sach)
boi cho`To swim by paddling one's arms (tua nhu cho)
boi chung`(toan) Common multiple
boi dap`To consolidate, to reinforce, to raise the level of
boi den`To paint a gloomy picture of
boi dung`Swim standing up
boi duong`To feed up, to foster, to improve, to cultivate#o recycle
boi ech`Breast stroke
boi giao`(ton) Apostatize
boi hoan`(tu cu, nghia cu) Collar of pearls#To refund money, to return property (taken and kept illegally)
boi hoat`(sinh hoc, hoa hoc) Suractived
boi hoi`ret, to be fretty
boi hoi boi hoi`xem boi hoi (lay)
boi loi`To swim, swimming (noi khai quat)
boi moc`To pick out for hostile criticism, to pick to pieces
boi nghia`(phuong vong an boi nghia) The ungrateful and the oblivious of favours received; the ingrate
boi ngua`To swim on one's back
boi nhiem`(y) surinfection
boi nho`To smear, to sully
boi on`Ungrateful
boi phan`Many times again#nhu phan boi
boi phat`(kte) over-issue
boi roi`(To be) embarrassed, (to be) puzzled
boi sai`Vietnamese trudgen stroke
boi so`Multiple
boi tac`o fasten up one's hair
boi te`(tu cu, nghia cu) Assistant (priest assisting the celebrant at the altar)
boi tham`Assessor
boi the`Perjure#here for; consequently
boi thu`Yield more than usual
boi thuc`Indigestion (vi an qua nhieu)
boi thuong`To pay damages, to pay compensation for
boi tich`Alluvium
boi tin`To commit a break of trust, to play a confidence trick
boi tinh`Order, decoration
boi trai`xem trai
boi tron`To lubricate
boi truc`Consolidate, strengthen (a dyke..)
boi tu`Deposit alluvia
boi uoc`To break one's promise, not to live up to one's pledge
boi viec`Creat more work#reat difficulties
boi voi`(tu cu, nghia cu) (Got gay boi voi) To have one's nape shaven and marked with lime (a punishment which adulteresses were subjected to)
boi vu trang`Swim, fully armed
boi xau`Denigrate, defame, say evil things about somebody
boi xuong`o canoe
bom`Apple#Bomb#omb#Flop#Mane#Pump#To pump, to inflate, to blow up#che bom Coarse tea#ogue
bom bay`Flying bomb, robot bomb
bom bem`At leisure, deliberately
bom bi`Steel-pellet bomb
bom bom`(ech nhai nhay bom bom) frogs flopped about in the water
bom bop`xem bop (lay)#xem bop (lay)
bom dan`Bomb and bullet, lethal weapons
bom day`Force-pump
bom hoa hoc`hemical bomb
bom hut`Suction-pump
bom khinh khi`Hydrogen bomb, H-bomb
bom lan tinh`Phosphorous bomb
bom nguyen tu`Atomic bomb, A-bomb
bom no cham`Time bomb
bom tiem`(y hoc) Syringe
bom tu truong`Magnetic bomb
bom xom`Shaggy#To tease or joke in a too familiar way (voi phu nu)
bon`(noi ve xe co, ngua) To run smoothly (tren quang duong dai)#o rush#Crowded with, encumbered with#uite#Flaw, impurity#Soiled, tainted#Gang, band, group#To rush#To save every amount of#o squeeze#Tub#Flower-) bed#o fertilize; to manure#our, fourth#xem ca bon#iver sand islet
bon ba`To scurry (qua nhieu chang duong vat va)#o tramp about through thick and thin
bon be`Pretty crowded with, pretty encumbered with, under heavy pressure of
bon ben`Quadripartite
bon bien`The four corners of the earth, the five continents, the whole world
bon bon`o run fast
bon bot`Palish#To cut down a little
bon chan`Thu bon chan (dong vat)+Quadruped
bon chen`To scramble
bon chon`(To be) on the tenterhooks, (to be) in a state of anxious suspense
bon cot`o trifle
bon cua`Squeeze money (out of somebody)
bon dai`To save every smallest thing#o squeeze the smallest amount of
bon hoa`lower bed
bon mot`To save every smallest bit of
bon phan`Duty, obligation
bon phuong`Four directions, the four corners of the earth
bon ron`To bubble profusely
bon rut`To squeeze
bon tap`(noi ve quan ddo^.i) To stage a forced march into a surprise attack
bon tau`To travel the length and width of (on business)
bong`(long bong) watery#Burned, scalded, burning, parching, scalding#Cotton, cotton-wool#otton-like material, fluff#ar#loom, flower#Fermented distiller's grains, fermented fodder#Unexpectedly, all of a sudden#Hollow#Mandarin's salary#erquisites, perks#odsend, boon; a piece of just my luck#High, high-pitched, treble#dung phu sau dong tu) High up#Shaddock#Slender waisted tomtom, hourglass-shaped tomtom#To swell, to puff#o carry in one's arms#Snow-white, shining#(noi ve lop mong ben ngoai) To peel off#Vesicle, bladder#hadow; shade; reflection#all; football#ried fish bladder#himney; blub; vale; transistor#himy; polished; glossy#xem ca bong
bong bang`Dressing (of wounds)
bong bay`lashy; glomy
bong be`To carry (tre con, noi khai quat)
bong benh`To bob
bong bong`Bladder#alloon#ubble#Lygodium (a climbing fern)#amboo shavings
bong bot`Ebullient
bong ca`wim bladder
bong chanh`Kingfisher
bong choc`Shortly, in next to no time
bong dai`Vesica
bong dang`igure; stamp; silhowette
bong dau`All of a sudden#y chance
bong den`amplight
bong dua`Joke
bong dung`By chance, by accident
bong gan`Sprain
bong gio`llusive;hint
bong gon`Kapok, silk-cotton#bsorbent cotton-wool
bong khong`By chance, by accident
bong lai`Elysium
bong lai tien canh`nhu bong lai
bong lau`Bulbul (chim)
bong loang`ustrous
bong loc`Loaves and fishes
bong lon`Jest, wag
bong long`Aimless
bong ngoai`Perquisites, perks
bong nhien`Unexpectedly, all of a sudden
bong ong`Beehive (lam bang khuc go rong)#nhu bong ong (xem bong)
bong pheng`To jest casually and nonsensically
bong ra`Varicella
bong sung`To present arms
bong trang`oonlight;moonshine
bong via`Heart, spirit#nhu bong dang
boong`Deck
boong boong`To ring and resound
bop`Plop#Pop#To tell straight in (someone's) face#Swell#To crush with fingers, to press with one's hand#o press, to put on, to apply#o sound#To slap lightly, to box lightly#With a thud#nhu bop
bop bung`To stint oneself in everything#o stomach it
bop chat`To be bluntly outspoken, to talk back bluntly
bop chet`To harmstring#To quell, to crush
bop chop`Hotheaded, impetuous
bop co`To oppress ruthlessly#o fleece, to sting
bop coi`o hoot; to sound
bop hong`nhu bop co
bop mat`Overcharge (of a trader)
bop meo`To distort, to wrest
bop mieng`To stint oneself on food, to stint oneself in everything
bop mom`(khau ngu) nhu bop mieng
bop mui`To bully easily
bop nan`To bleed white
bop nghet`To stiffle, to strangle
bop oc`nhu bop tran
bop tran`To cudgel one's brains for
bot`(nhu bot) Small post#oot#Birth-mark#To diminish, to cut down, to decrease, to reduce#o lay by part of#Foam, froth#Frayed#aded#ale#Starch, flour#owder#nhu bot#olice station#igarette-holder
bot bien`Sponge
bot giat`Washing-powder
bot khoi`To flare up violently, to surge vigorously (noi ve phong trao quan chung)
bot mep`Foam, froth
bot mieng`To stint oneself in food, to cut down food expenditure#o cut down the cackle
bot ngot`Sodium glutamate, seasoning powder
bot nhao`Pastry
bot phat`To shoot up, to flare up violently
bot tan`Talcum
bot tay`To relax pressure, to relax severity (trong hanh dong doi xu)
bot xen`To take a rake-off, to appropriate part of
bot xo`nhu bot xen#o bargain, to haggle
bu`Cloyed, satiated, sottish#Lumpy with, thick with (ham y che)#ig#Mama#amboo cage (for fowls)#Old man, old woman#Plump, chubby, sappy#Silly; stupid#To make good, to make up, to compensate#Dishevelled, unkept#o suck
bu bam`Plump, chubby, sappy
bu bu`an no bu bu To be completely cloyed with food
bu co`(thong tuc) Be satieted [up to the neck] with food
bu dap`To make up for, to compensate
bu dau`Over head and ears (in work)
bu du`onkey
bu hao`Compensate for a loss, make up for a loss
bu hong`nhu bu co #e reduced to silence
bu khu`To have heart-to-heart talks together, to have a rollicking time together, to hobnob with (together)
bu lai`In return for
bu lo`In compensation for losses
bu lu bu loa`To raise a hullabaloo
bu nhin`Scarecrow, dummy#uppet, quisling
bu sua`Plump (thank to good milk)
bu tri`To foster, to bring up carefully; to help wholeheartedly
bu tru`To balance, to complement mutually
bu xu`Ruffled#Untidy; unkempt
bua`Amulet, charm#Meal#(chi khoang thoi gian phai chiu dung viec gi)#ay#Nest of forked twigs (cho tam lam ke'n)#To cast, to fan out like a net, to surround like a net#Rake#To rake#Topsy-turvy#ash, easy-going, (at) random#Tartar (o rang), smegma (o am ho)#To split, to cleave#Nonsensical, improper#Wild mangosteen#khau ngu) pigheaded#(khau ngu) Pigheaded#ammer; axe
bua ba`Charm and bait (noi khai quat)
bua bai`nhu bua
bua bon`Lying about disorderly, littering
bua cao`Rake
bua chen`Feasting
bua chu`Amulet (de tru ma quy)
bua chu nhi`(cu) One tooth-row harrow
bua co`Feast
bua dia`Pulverizer
bua me`Charm
bua phua`Rash, rashly (noi khai quat)
bua tiec`Banquet
bua vay`Encircle, besiege, lay siage to
bua yeu`Philtre, love-charm
buc`(chi don vi cua cai gi thuoc loai tam)#To force, to coerce#Platform, dais#To crack#o pop#o fret; fretty, fretful#nhu bac
buc bach`To force, to coerce (noi khai quat)#khau ngu) Pressing, urgent
buc boi`Sultry#o fret; fretty (noi khai quat)
buc cung`Extort depositions from
buc doc`(To be) testy
buc hai`To force to die unjustifiably
buc hiep`To coerce and bully, to oppress
buc hon`To force to marry (someone)
buc minh`Tetchy#[Be] tetchy
buc rut`Urgent, pressing
buc thiet`Pressing, urgent
buc thu`etter
buc tranh`icture; painting
buc tu`To force to commit suicide
buc tuc`Fretty and angry
buc xa`Radiation#To radiate
buc xa ke`Radiometer
buc xuc`Pressing
bui`Dust#pray#ush, grove, clump#Having a buttery taste
bui bam`Dust (noi khai quat)
bui doi`Loose derelict; street-urchin
bui hong`Red dust; the earth, this world
bui ngui`Melancholy, sad to the verge of tears
bui nhui`Skein of straw, skein of bamboo shavings#inder
bui ram`Thicket, bush
bui tai`Palatable, honeyed
bui tran`nhu bui hong
bum`(tuc) Fart#To scoop up with one's hands#o cup in one's hand, to screen with one's hand#o clench, to bite#Two handfuls
bum bup`xem bup (lay)
bum mieng`o gag
bun`Mud#ermicelli
bun do`Mire; squalor
bun lay`Muddy, slushy
bun run`Flagging, flaccid
bun xin`Mean, stingy
bung`Belly#eart#Big cooking pot#To burst open#o boil to a pulp#Limp, flabby, sallow#Mangrove swamp#To carry#o cover, to stretch over, to cup in one's hand#To flare brightly, to turn suddenly red hot, to burst out ebulliently#To wake up) suddenly#To flare up, to break out#To lift, to take up (de chuyen di trong noi khac)#o flip; to flick;#o spin
bung beo`Sallow and thin
bung bien`Mangrove swamp area; South Vietnam's guerilla base
bung bit`To cover up, to suppress, to hush up
bung buc`Easily crambling, easily cracking
bung bung`Chokefull#Sallowish#To blaze up#xem bung (lay)
bung chan`Calf (of the leg)
bung chay`Burst into flames
bung coc`Froog-bellied
bung da`Digestive system (noi khai quat)#eart, one's heart of hearts
bung duoi`Lower abdomen
bung nhung`Flabby (noi ve thit)#Flabby, flaccid
bung no`To break out
bung phe`xem phe
bung xung`Stooge, scapegoat
buoc`Step, pace#To bind, to tie#o force, to compel#o lay
buoc dau`Initial
buoc di`Stage in the evolution
buoc duong`Stages on the road traversed, past stage
buoc hut`Miss one's footing
buoc long`Reluctantly
buoc luot`Glide
buoc ngoat`Turning-point
buoc nhay vot`Bound, leap
buoc tien`Advance
buoc toi`To accuse, to charge
buoi`Pomelo, shaddock#here are several kinds of Buoi (pomelo) regionally famous for their taste, and each of them is named after the locality where it is grown (Buoi Bien Hoa, Buoi Phuc Trach, Buoi Thuan Hai, for example). Buoi duong Phuc Trach (Phuc Trach sweet pomelo) has been famous widely in the country after it was awarded a medal at a national fruit fair organised in 1938. The Far East Economic Review remarked: "In Vietnam's central coast, there is a particularly delicious pomelo. Kept after a while, the juice in the pomelo segments becomes muddy as if it is some sort of sugar itself. You can try the fruit as much as you can"#Spell, length of time, time, period, moment#danh tu (tuc)#rick, cock#nhu boi
buoi chieu`Afternoon#n the afternoon
buoi dao`Rosy-pulped polemo
buoi duong`Sweet polemo
buoi sang`Morning#n the morning
buoi toi`Evening; in the evening#ight; at night-time
buoi trua`Noon, midday#t noon, at midday
buom`Sail#em thuan#Tattered#nhu buom buom
buom buom`Butterfly
buom lai`(hang hai) Mizen-sail
buom mui`(hang hai) Foresail
buom ong`Butterflies and bees; the libertine set
buon`Sad, melancholy, grieved#To hasten, to hurry#To sell, to trade
buon ba`Sad, melancholy
buon bac`To deal in foreign currencies
buon ban`Commerce, trade (noi khai quat)
buon buc`Sad and fretty
buon buot`Feeling a rather sharp pain, feeling a rather biting cold
buon cat`Trade in whole contingents of goods, trade by wholesale
buon cuoi`Funny
buon lau`Smuggle
buon long`Heavy-hearted
buon ngu`Feel sleepy
buon nguoi`Trade in slaves
buon non`Feel sick
buon phien`Sad and worried
buon rau`Sad-looking, sorrowful
buon ruoi`Wearing a dismal face from sadness; very sad
buon te`Dull, humdrum
buon tenh`Very sad
buon tham`Dismal
buon thiu`Gloomily sad
buon tien`nhu buon bac
buon tinh`Bored, at a loose end
buong`Big-size bamboo#amboo tube#(To be) done for#Bunch#chi tap hop hai hay nhieu cai xep thanh chum)#oom, chamber#Obstinate, stubborn, self-willed#To let go, to let loose#o let down, to drop
buong binh`Obstinate, stubborn (noi khai quat)
buong dao`nhu buong khue
buong giay`Office, bureau, study
buong hoa`apitulum
buong khong`(van chuong,cu) Solitary room (of a widow or a single young girl)
buong khue`Bower, boudoir
buong lai`Steering bridge, steering room, cab
buong long`Relax
buong may`Engine-room
buong mieng`(khau ngu) Open one's mouth to speak
buong tay`Stop work[ing], knock off
buong tha`To disengage, to spare
buong the`nhu buong khue
buong toi`Dark room
buong troi`To let drift
buong trung`Ovary
buong tuong`Self-indulgent
buong xong`To drop some sharp words, to drop some words curtly
buong xuoi`To let (something) run its course
buot`Feeling a sharp pain, feeling a biting cold; sharp, biting#To let slip down, to let slip out#o slip off, to slip out
buot mieng`To make a slip of the tongue
buou`Hump#xcrescence, knob#To swell into a bump
buou co`nhu buou giap
buou giap`Goitre
buou gu`Gibbosity
bup`Pop#ud; shoot
bup be`oll; dolly
but`Buddha#To tear, to snatch, to pluck#o cut#en; pen brush
but ky`otes
but moc`Bald cypress
but phap`tyle of writing; penmanship
but rut`Fidgety, uneasy, restless
buu anh`Picture postcard
buu chinh`Post
buu cuc`Post-office
buu dien`Post and telegraphy#ost-office
buu kien`Post parcel
buu pham`Postal matter
buu phi`Postage
buu ta`Postman, mailman (My)
buu thiep`Postcard
buu tin vien`ail clerk
buyt`Bus
ca`(dung han che trong mot so to hop) Eldest, senior, main, biggest#On a grand scale, on the greatest scale#Click, pawl#Steel tip, toe plate#Fish#(particle denoting fish-like animals living in water)#Egg-plant#Animal testicle#To rub#To file#To grind#To stir up a miff#Tomato#Mug (about 1/4 litre)#Measure (from 1/4 litre to 1 or 2 litres)#Shift#Team (on the same shift)#To rub
ca bi`Trong luong ca bi#ross weight
ca bien`ea-fish; salt-water fish
ca biet`Particular
ca biet hoa`To particularize
ca bo`onnet (of car)
ca bon`Flounder, sole
ca bong`Goby
ca bot`Fry
ca cam`To complain, to grumble
ca cao`bot) Cacao
ca chay`Hilsa herring#Red-eyed carp, squaliobarbus
ca chep`Carp
ca chim`Butterfish
ca chua`omato
ca chuoi`nhu ca qua
ca chuon`Flying fish
ca co`nhu ca kho
ca con`oung fish
ca cuong`Belostomatid#elostomatid essence#Black-necked grackle, black-necked starling
ca dai de`Aubergine
ca dao`Folk-song#ix-eight foot distich (on the same pattern as the folk-songs)#Sawfish
ca den`Even
ca doc duoc`Datura
ca doi`Mullet
ca dong`iver fish; fresh-water fish
ca dua`Conger pike
ca duoi`Ray
ca gan`Bold, having plenty of pluck
ca gay`nhu ca chep
ca gi`(thong tuc) nhu ca kho#nhu ca kho
ca giec`Crucian carp
ca go`(xau) Miserly
ca hat`Singing (noi khai quat)
ca heo`Porpoise
ca hop`anned fish; tinned fish
ca ke`Palaverting, telling a long yarn
ca kheo`Stilt#tilt-bird
ca khia`To pick a quarrel
ca kho`Trashy, gimcrack, worthless, of bad quality#ried fish
ca khuc`Song
ca kich`Opera, operetta
ca ky`ongstress ; female opera singer
ca la meng`nhu ca meng
ca lam`To stammer
ca lang`Hemibagrus
ca lau`(cu) House of songstresses
ca lo`Garrison cap (My)#Like a bad-mannered vagrant
ca loc`nhu ca qua
ca lon bon`nhu ca bon
ca mang`Bango, milkfish
ca map`Shark
ca me`Hypophthalmichthys
ca meng`Bad, inferior, worthless
ca moi`ardine
ca mua`Dance and song (noi khai quat)
ca muoi`alted fish
ca ne`Complaisant, compliant
ca ngay`ll day; day long
ca ngoi`To sing the praise of, to extol
ca ngu`Tunny, horse mackerel
ca ngua`Seahorse
ca nhac`Music and song#To limp
ca nham`Shark
ca nhan`Individual, personal
ca nhan chu nghia`Individualistic, egoistic
ca nheo`Mudfish, sheatfish
ca nhi`Female singer, songstress (trong xa hoi cu)
ca nhu`Threadfin
ca nieng`Cybister
ca no`otor boat; speed boat
ca noc`Puffer
ca nuoc`Dugong#Fish and water; close relationship
ca nuong`(cu) Young songstress, girl singer
ca ong`nhu ca voi
ca phe`Coffee
ca phen`Goatfish, surmullet
ca qua`Snake-head (mullet)
ca quyet`Resolute, determined, firm
ca ra`Carat#Ring#nhu ke ca
ca rem`ce-cream
ca ri`urry powder 
ca rich ca tang`Leisurely
ca ro`Check#Climbing perch, anabas
ca ro Phi`Tilapia#Tilapia
ca ro phi`Tilapia#Tilapia
ca ro thia`nhu ca thia
ca ron`nhu dua gion
ca rot`Carrot#arrot
ca rung`(cu) Tambour
ca sa`(Buddhist monk's) frock
ca sau`Crocodile
ca si`Singer
ca song`Garrupa
ca sop`Striped snake-head
ca tam`Sturgeon
ca thay`In all, altogether, taken as a whole
ca the`ndividual
ca then`Shy, self-conscious
ca thia`Macropodus
ca thon bon`nhu ca bon
ca thot`Limping
ca thu`Mackerel
ca tieng`Loud-voiced
ca tim`nhu ca dai de
ca tin`Credulous, gullible
ca tinh`Personality
ca tinh hoa`To individualize, to individuate
ca trau`nhu ca qua
ca tre`Catfish
ca trich`Herring
ca troi`Major cap
ca tru`Ca Tru - an original art performance of academic character - has been preserved for the past 10 centuries.To appreciate Ca Tru is to appreciate poetry and music. Ca Tru appeared officially under Nha Hau Ly (11th century). First, it served royal and religious rituals and was called Hat Khuon. Later, it was used in banquets, weddings, friendly meetings... and called Hat Hang Hoa Ca Tru had bamboo castanets as principal+instrument. By beating time on tomtoms, spectators accompanied and praised the singer. Ca Tru was also called Hat Nha Tro (singing or dancing while pulling funny tricks), Hat Thuong (Singing to be rewarded by king or mandarins), Hat Cua Quyen (singing in royal palaces), Hat Cua Dinh (singing for religious rituals), Hat a dao (name of a famous songstress in the Ly times).... Under the French domination, Ca Tru declined. Nowadays, it is restored as a type of original popular art#What is a Ca Tru declamation? Originally, Ca Tru was like cheo singing and served at ceremonies and festivals in the northern delta. When these ceremonies and festivals were no longer held, Ca Tru became a type of chamber music serving as intellectual food for those who would like to enjoy music and poetry#Music and poetry are the basis of Ca Tru and decide which ensemble of principal instruments, musicians and subordinate instruments should provide the accompaniment. Ca Tru has many melodies that are sung differently, but the chief is singing-reciting: A singer and a musician playing a long-necked lute-like instrument. Also taking part is a member of the audience who expresses his appreciation and response by beating a drum. A rather special description fits the songstress of former days: "Fine clothes, velvet turban, delicate bobtailed hair, a moon-shaped face, knife-sharp eyes, refined manners, with sweet words, mild as flowers, transparent as snow, her beauty and charm are second only to Kim Van Kieu's..." To perform as expected, the+singer must practise very hard and know many tunes. A male musician accompanies the singer. He too practises hard so as to be in perfect harmony with the singer. The music accompaniment consists of a "phach" - a bamboo instrument beaten with two wooden sticks - and "trong chau" - a drum beaten by a member of the audience in appreciation or comment. Of course, this member of the audience is very experienced at beating the drum - a single beat, three or five successive beats and nine beats at the climax to be "in tune" with the lute. A timely response by the drummer encourages the singer who knows that she has met someone who both understands and appreciates her talent. These three instruments: The lute, the "phach" and the "trong chau" are inseparable. Being a subordinate+instrument, the drum is essential as a bridge between the performer and audience. The harmonious combination of the lute, the "phach" and the+human voice makes it a perfect performance as praised in these lines by Vu Hoang Chuong: Sweet phach, passionate lute mild smoke cushion. The sad voice lingers on in the middle of night. To enjoy Ca Tru is to enjoy both music and singing. The art of Ca Tru is both high and original. Its sound range originates from that of the lullaby in the Red River delta. Ca Tru - with water puppetry - is+indigenous to Vietnam. It is a valuable legacy for Vietnamese culture#Many talented poets like Chu Manh Trinh, Nguyen Cong Tru, Tu Xuong, Duong Khue and Tan Da composed excellent tunes, extraordinarily pure and high-falutin to charm the audience.+At the beginning of the 20th century, before the 1945, there were many places where Ca Tru was performed: Kham Thien, Bo De, Lo Khe (Hanoi); Quan Ba Mau, Quynh Cu (Hai Phong) and throughout Bac Ninh, Hai Duong and Nam Dinh provinces. But then, Ca Tru became Co Dau - performed by a sing-song girl or type of geisha. The art of Ca Tru was forgotten because it was thought to be a product of the ruling+class; the singers whores and the audience no more than hedonists. Singers abandoned their careers because of this bias and inhabitants of the Kham Thien area even left their homes because of it. Before 1976, musician Nguyen Xuan Khoat was the only Vietnamese musicologist to study Ca Tru. Ca Tru artists are still rare now, but attention is being given their art. Lo Khe village, Phu Do (in Ha Noi) is considered the cradle of Ca Tru and on the 6th of the 4th lunar month and the 13th of the tenth lunar month each year, members of the Ca Tru circle hold initiator-worshipping celebrations Artists young and old sing the Ca Tru, always beginning with two pieces: Non Mai and Hong Hanh.+The artist who deserves most praise for the revival and world-wide spread of Ca Tru is Doctor-Professor Tran Van Khe He has recorded Ca Tru, Quan Ho and cheo songs and declamations and sent them to France for the UNESCO Musical Committee to study. As a result, many recordings of Ca Tru and Quan Ho songs have been made. The support of eminent artist Quach Thi Ho has made the recordings a great success. All the original features of Ca Tru are prominent, and Ho was evaluated by the Musical+Committee and awarded with an honorary commendation with these lines: "We thank you for your contribution to the keeping of an original, traditional art legacy of Vietnam and an exceptional delicacy of mankind". Since then, Vietnam has sent a delegation to an Asian tribute held in the People's Democratic Republic of Korea where Ho's recordings were among the most honoured. A Ca Tru club has been established in Ha Noi, a place for all of Vietnam's excellent Ca Tru artists. It not only revives an old+musical form but attracts foreign musicologists: American, English, German and Japanese. American researcher Mirada Krenzen has written a persuasive study, Vietnam's Traditional Music Process. It was presented at a seminar to discuss Vietnam's traditional music in Ha Noi in 1994. Krenzen possesses a deep knowledge of Ca Tru and has gained the admiration of Vietnamese musicologists. She wrote: "Ca Tru seems to have a magic power, a fermented substance to charm the listeners. Once I understood Ca Tru, I understood the Vietnamese people better". It is possible that Ca Tru is a patch of the Vietnamese soul that Krenzen has understood? ()
ca tung`To glorify, to extol#o land; to compliment; to praise#nhay ca tung To jump of joy#nhu ca tung
ca tuoi`resh fish
ca uon`poiled fish
ca vang`Gold-fish
ca vat`ie; necktie
ca vinh`Sing and praise, sing the praise of
ca voi`Whale
ca vu`song and dance
ca vu kich`Opera-ballet
ca vuoc`Perch
ca xuong`Singing
cac`Cock, prick#Stone hard, shrivelled#nhu hao#very, all#To pay the difference (in a trade-in), to give in compensation
cac cac`Quack (a duck's cry)
cac co`Brought about by the irony of fate, ill-timed
cac ke`nhu tac ke
cac lac`nhu lac cac
cac vi`Ladies and gentlemen; you
cach`(dung han che trong mot vai to hop) Dull#To give up (vi so hoac vi ghe't)#o clatter#Way, manner, fashion#ase
cach biet`To separate completely, to cut off#o be very different from
cach buc`To cut off, to separate, to isolate
cach cau tao`tructure
cach chuc`o dismiss; to fire; to relieve of one's function
cach dien`Isolated, insulated
cach dien hoa`Stylize
cach dieu hoa`To stylize
cach ly`o isolate
cach mang`Revolution
cach mang hoa`To revolutionize
cach mang xa hoi`he social revolution
cach ngon`Maxim, adage, saying
cach nhat`Every other day
cach quang`Intermittent
cach rach`(thong tuc) Cumbersome, cumbrous
cach tan`To renovate
cach thuc`Style, mode (noi khai quat)
cach thuy`(dung phu sau danh tu) Bain-marie, water bath (My)
cach tro`To separate and obstruct
cach xa`Far away from
cai`Cabbage#To change, to alter#o plait in relief, to embroider in relief#Corporal#oreman#ailkeeper, warder#To give up#To argue#o defend, to act as advocate for#To pin, to fasten#o lay, to set, to plant
cai bap`(Head) cabbage
cai be`Field cabbage
cai bien`To arrange (noi ve von nghe thuat cu)#To transform
cai buong`o argue obstinately
cai cach`danh tu & dong tu#eform
cai cay`Mustard
cai chinh`To give the lie to, to reject as unfounded, to correct
cai co`To have an argument with (noi khai quat)
cai cu`White radish
cai cua`o bar ; to bolt the door
cai da`Mother#khau ngu) (denoting a young girl of one's rank or below)#other, mother of vinegar##First, the first thing
cai dang`To disguise oneself
cai danh`o change one's name
cai dau`Colza
cai dau dai`Knavish contractor
cai ghe`Itch-mite
cai gia`To remarry (sau khi chong chet hoac sau khi ly di)
cai giam`Mother of vinegar
cai hoa`(cu) Transform, change, reform#Cauliflower
cai hoi`Be sorry, repent
cai le`Argue
cai lon`To quarrel
cai luong`To improve, to reform#Reformist#Reform#eformed theatre in the South Vietnam
cai ma`nhu cai tang
cai nhiem`(cu) Designate to a new post
cai qua`Correct a mistake, right an error
cai quan`To manage
cai sua`To wean
cai tang`To disinter for reburial
cai tao`To transform, to improve, to remould, to re-educate
cai than`ontractor 's foreman
cai the anh hung` hero over the world
cai thien`To improve, to raise the standard of
cai tho`oss
cai tien`To improve
cai to`To reshuffle, to reorganize
cai toi danh`(luat) Commute
cai tong`Canton chief (thoi thuoc Phap)
cai trang`To dress in disguise#White cabbage
cai tri`To rule
cai tu hoan sinh`o revive; to restore to life
cai tuan`(cu) Chief of village guards
cai va`To bicker, to squabble
cai xoong`Cress, watercress
cam`Bran#Chin#Dumb, mute#ilent#Lute-like instrument; musical instrument#To hold, to keep#Orange#hildren's disease due to malnutrition#qua cam#am#Xem mau cam#To content oneself with, to resign oneself to#Police officer#gao cam, nep cam) Violet sticky rice#Snare, trap#To catch a cold, to be ill (because of a sudden change in the weather, too much sun..)#o feel#o be moved, to be affected#To pitch, to set up, to plant, to fix#o stake out#o hang (the head)#nhu nan hoa#To bear resentment against#to fix; to plant
cam bang`As if
cam bao`Brocade court robe
cam bay`Trap (noi khai quat)
cam binh`To forbid, to prohibit, to ban#o seal off, to place out of bounds##Royal palace guard
cam but`Be a writer
cam ca`Music and song
cam cai`To be a banker (in card games)
cam cam`Shivering
cam can`nhu cam cau
cam cang`Pull a cart#khau ngu) Conduct (a band, an orchestra..)
cam canh`To feel compassion, to feel pity#Watch-announcing#poradic
cam cap`To clatter
cam chac`To hold (something) for certain; to be sure of success
cam chan`Pin down
cam chanh`Sour orange
cam chau`To beat time on a tomtom#nhu cam nhung
cam chi`To strictly ban
cam chiu`o reconcile; to be content with 
cam chung`At an indifferent level, half-heartedly, perfunctorily
cam chuong`Pink, carnation
cam co`Completely wrapped up in what one is doing; without turning one's head#To confine to a solitary cell#To mortgage
cam cu`To contend
cam cua`To forbid (someone) to darken one's door
cam cui`(To be) completely wrapped up in (some work)#(To be) fully stretched, (to be) at full stretch
cam cung`To confine to the house (a highborn girl in a feudal society)
cam dan giay`o stick no bills; to post no bills
cam dat`Stake out land (of a debtor)
cam dau`To be the ringleader of#nhu cam co#lindly, servilely
cam dia`Out of bounds area
cam do`To seduce
cam doan`To forbid arbitrarily, to prevent arbitrarily#To guarantee, to answer for
cam dong`To be moved
cam duc`Practise continence
cam duong`Sweet orange
cam gan`Bear deep resentment against
cam ghet`To feel resentment and hatred against, to resent and abhor
cam giac`Sensation, impression#To have a sensation of
cam gian`To feel a deep resentment against, to deeply resent
cam giay`Thin-skinned sweet orange
cam hac`(cu) Peaceful life (of a mandarin) (cam: guitar; hac: flamingo)
cam han`Catch a chill
cam hap`(thong tuc) Cracked, potty
cam hoa`To convert
cam hoai`(van chuong, cu) Feel nostalgia; have a touching recollection of the past
cam hoi`To keep body and soul together
cam hon`To resent and hate
cam hong`Be silent
cam hung`Inspiration
cam ket`To undertake, to pledge
cam khai`To grieve
cam khau`To lose one's power of speech (when at the point of death)
cam kich`To be moved and fired
cam ky`o abstain
cam lai`To take the helm, to be at the wheel, to hold the steering wheel, to steer#arian Kingwood
cam lanh`nhu cam han
cam linh`he prohibition
cam lo`(ton giao) Holy water
cam long`To content oneself with#To hold back one's feeling
cam mao`To be indisposed (by a cold...), to catch a cold
cam mau`Hemostatic
cam men`Admire and esteem, be filled with admiration and esteem for
cam moc`Set up (plant) landmarks
cam mom`Shut up, hold one's tongue#old your tongue!; shut up!
cam nam`(dong tu) Prehensile
cam nang`Brocade bag of last resorts (in ancient stories, containing devices helping one out of a fix..)#anual, handbook#Get a sunstroke
cam nghi`Impression and feeling
cam nhiem`To be infected by
cam nhu`As if
cam nhung`Flowered silk cloth
cam on`To thank, to express one's gratitude#nhu cam on
cam phan`To feel indignant#To resign oneself to one's fate
cam phong`(cu) Catch a cold (wind)#(ton giao) Immurement#dua) Prohibition of sexual relations
cam phuc`To feel great admiration for, to admire greatly
cam quan`Command troops#The sense organs
cam quang`Photosensible
cam quyen`To hold power, to be in power
cam ruong`Stake out fields (said of a debtor)
cam sanh`King orange
cam sat`Conjugal harmony
cam sung`To cuckold
cam ta`To express one's gratitude
cam tam`To resign oneself to, to make up one's mind to
cam tau ma`Noma
cam thach`Marble
cam than`(ngon) Exclamative, interjectional
cam thanh`Forbidden citadel
cam thao`Liquorice
cam thay`o feel
cam thong`To sympathize with, to be understanding
cam thu`(cu) Music and books; intellectual life#Birds and animals, beasts#To be sensitive#To feel a vindictive hatred for
cam thuong`To feel pity for
cam tinh`Feeling#Sympathy#To be born under the auspices of (one of the twelve animals whose names are given to the lunar years)
cam trai`Camp
cam trich`To conduct (a choir), to guide
cam tu`Embroidered brocade; very beautiful landscape; very beautiful literature#Keep in prison, imprison, jail#To brave death
cam tuc`To fret with resentment against
cam tuong`Impression#omment, remarks
cam tuyen`(cu) Fresh-water spring
cam ung`Induction#(noi ve hien tuong co the) To react
cam van`ut an embargo on
cam vao`o entry; No admittance
cam ve`nhu cam binh
cam xuc`To be affected by emotion#Emotion
can`(To go) dry#sed up, nearly exhausted#(noi ve dat trong trot) Exhausted, impoverished#tunted#Dregs, lees, sediment#Handle, staff#lower-stalk#To roll into thin layers, to laminate#o gin#House#ompartment#oot, radical; radical sign#Near, close#hort-sighted#Scale, balance#eight#atty (0,605kg)#ilo#The third sign of the eight-sign figure#regs, lees, sediment#To be annoyed (by something pricking)#o obstruct, to hinder#o deduct#To bite#o pit well#o stick fast#To inlay#To prevent, to stop, to bar#Barrage, dam#To rush headlong through#o raid, to mop up#Wanton#Walking-stick#eaven's stem#an#To lengthen, to broaden (cloth, paper) with bits of same material#o advise (someone) against doing something; to dissuade (someone) from doing something; to restrain#Water dropwort#haft, rod#tem, tube#eck (of a violin..)#ibrator (in a monocord instrument)#Need, must, to want
can an`To be condemned, to be convicted
can ba`Dregs
can bach`o inform respectfully
can ban`Bascule balance#Basis#Basic, essential#Basically, essentially, in the main
can bang`Balance, equilibrium#To balance, to equilibrate
can benh`Cause (origin) of a disease
can bo`Cadre
can can`Balance beam, balance
can cao`(tu cu) Inform respectfully
can cap`(it dung) Urgent
can cau`Crane#Fishing-rod#To get caught, to be enticed
can chi`(noi ve moi) Pencilled with betel juice#noi ve duong net) Neatly pencilled#The signs of the Heavenly Stems and of the Earthly Branches (of ancient cosmology)#ave something to do with
can chien`lose combat; hand - to - hand fight
can choi`roomstick
can co`Have to do with#Reason, ground#Sure means of livelihood#Thrifty with an eye to building a bigger capital#To beseech, to implore plaintively
can coc`Stunted (noi khai quat)
can coi`(noi ve dat trong trot) Exhausted#tunted, dwarfed
can cu`Basis, foundation#ase#To base oneself on#Laborious, industrious
can cu dia`base
can cuoc`Identity#dentity card
can dai`Modern time#Turban and belt (of mandarins' court robes); court robes
can dam`Courageous#Courage
can dan`To recommend
can dia`Diem can dia (thien van hoc)#erigee#Roberval balance
can do`Root cause#Weights and measures
can doi`Balanced, well-proportioned#To balance
can du`To be implicated in#(khau ngu) (dung truoc gi, trong cau nghi van hoac phu dinh) To have something to do with
can dung`Needed, wanted
can gian`To advise against doing something
can he`To concern, to affect#Momentous, important
can ho`Flat, apartment
can hoi`Weight of an animal still alive, live weight
can huong`(tu cu) Recent situation
can ke`Careful, detailed, minute#To calk
can keo`To weigh (noi khai quat, ham y khinh)
can khon`Heaven and earth; universe
can kiem`Industrious and thrifty
can kim`nhu can dai
can kip`Pressing
can lai`Recently
can lam sang`(y hoc) Paraclinical
can lao`Hard-working, toiling#nhu lao dong
can loi`Say everything one has to say
can luc`(tu cu) Muscular force
can man`Industrious and clever
can mat`With strict security precautions
can mau`(Thuoc can mau) Mordant
can moc ham`To weigh an animal slaughtered; weight of an animal slaughtered
can nang`Weigh
can nao`Nerves and brain
can ngan`To dissuade from doing something
can nguyen`Origin
can nhac`To consider carefully, to weigh the pros and cons of
can nhan`To grumble, to grunt#nhu can nhan
can nhat`Diem can nhat (thien van hoc)#erihelion
can nhiet doi`Subtropical zone
can pham`To be guilty of an offence#nhu bi can
can qua`War, fire and sword
can quac`Fair sex, fair lady
can quay`Unruly, wayward
can quet`To raid, to mop up
can rang`To clench one's teeth
can ro`Perverse, wicked
can rut`To worry, to harass, to sting
can sa`Hashish
can so`(toan) Root#estiny, fate
can su`Junior staff-member
can ta`(thuc vat) Water dropwort#Roman balance#atty (0,605 Kg)
can tac`Careful
can tay`(thuc vat) Celery#Kilo, Kiogramme
can thai`o be pregnant
can than`Careful#Trusted courtier#areful; cautious; heedful
can thi`Short-sighted, myopic
can thien binh`Steelyard
can thiep`To intervene, to interfere
can thiet`Indispensable
can thu`Letter - weight
can thuc`(toan) Radical
can tinh`(cu) Nature
can trat`nhu trat
can tre em`Baby - weighing machine
can tro`To bar, to obstruct, to block#Obstacle
can trom`Bite without barking (said of a dog)#teal a bite, backbite
can trong`Serious and careful
can truc`nhu can cau
can truong`Courageous, unafraid of danger#Heart
can tui`Be penniless
can van`To interrogate
can ve`Guards#ide-de-camp
can vet`Trolley
can viet`enholder
can vu`Attendant (to a high-ranking official)
can vuong`To support the king, to rescue the king (when he was in difficulty)
can xe`Deep bamboo basket#To worry, to gnaw
can xich dao`(dia ly) Subequatorial
can xung`Proportionate
can yeu`Indispensable and important, essential
cang`Chela, claw, nipper, pincers#haft#(dung truoc dong tu, tinh tu) All the more, all the...-er#he more...; the...-er the...-er#Concentration camp#To stretch, to spread, to strain#Tightly stretched, fully spread, taut, tense#Pin, shank, leg#Port, harbour#Roofed hammock, palanquin, palankeen#tretcher#To carry on a stretcher#o take charge of, to assume the responsibility for#nhay cang To hop from one foot to another (out of joy) (noi ve tre em)#nhu cac#Brazen-faced, impudent
cang cang`Quite impudent
cang chan`Shank#Shank
cang dang`To take charge of, to assume the responsibility for
cang hay`So much the better
cang oc`Cudgel one's brains
cang tay`Forearm
cang thang`Fully stretched, fully strained, tense
canh`Branch, twig, sprig#Surfeited#Edge#ide#Sight, scenery, landscape#rnament#cene#hot (with a cine-camera)#Soup#arp#atch#Wing#etal#ane
canh bao`lert; alarm
canh beo`(van chuong, cu) Drifting condition (of a woman)
canh bi`To patrol
canh binh`Policeman
canh buom`Sail
canh cach`To clatter#xem cach (lay)#dia phuong) Grasshopper
canh cai`Reform; go through changes
canh cam`Green beetle
canh canh`Haunting, harrying
canh cao`To warn, to serve a strong warning on
canh chay`(cu) Far into the night
canh chiet`(nong) Layer
canh cua`oor; door leaf
canh cui`Weaving
canh cung`(ddo^.ng) Coleopteran#Bow back
canh deu`(ddo^.ng) Isopteran
canh dong`Field
canh ga`Cockcrow (announcing dawn)#Side flap (che mua o hai ben xe)
canh gac`To mount guard, to mount sentry
canh ghep`(nong) Graft
canh giac`To be vigilant, to be watchful, to be on one's guard#Vigilance, watchfulness
canh giam`(nong) Cutting#Sour fish soup
canh gian`Cockroach's wing
canh gioi`To watch, to mount guard
canh giong`(ddo^.ng) Homopteran
canh giu`o guard
canh hau`(thuong tu) Chum, buddy
canh hoa`(thuc) Petal
canh huong`Happening, vicissitude
canh khac`(ddo^.ng) Heteropteran
canh khoe`Oblique hint, innuendo
canh khuy`lbow
canh khuya`Far into the night
canh kien`Sticklac, lac
canh kien trang`Benzoin
canh la`Branches and leaves, foliage#Low branch, low-lying branch
canh mang`(ddo^.ng) Hymenopteran
canh moi`(thuc) Labellum
canh mui`la
canh nanh`ealous
canh ngo`Plight
canh nhanh`Branches, boughs
canh nong`Agriculture, farming
canh nua`(ddo^.ng) Hemipteran
canh phan`(ddo^.ng) Lepidopteran
canh phong`(san khau) Scenery, scene#To watch
canh quan`(dia ly) Landscape#Wing
canh quat`Propeller
canh quat gio`an blade
canh rieu`Carb soup
canh sac`Natural scenery (from the colours and light angle)
canh sat`Policeman
canh se`Crossed
canh sen`Lotus petal
canh sinh`o come to life again; to restore to life
canh tac`To till, to cultivate
canh tan`(van chuong) End of the night#To renovate (ve chinh tri, xa hoi)
canh tay`Arm, right arm, right hand
canh thang`(ddo^.ng) Orthopteran
canh thiep`Age card (of the betrothed)
canh ti`To go shares (with somebody) (in something)
canh tinh`Situation, condition#To awaken, to open the eyes of
canh tra`Halcyon's wing
canh tranh`To compete
canh tri`(Beautiful) natural sight
canh tuan`o watch and patrol
canh tuong`Sight
canh up`(ddo^.ng) Plecopteran
canh vat`Scenery
canh vay`(ddo^.ng) Lepidopteran
canh ve`Guard
cao`Jelly, glue (of animal bones or plants used as medicine)#ataplasm#High, tall, steep, towering#Manuscript#Rake#To rake#o scratch#o gnaw#Royal edict-like announcement#ox#To submit (to mandarin)#o pretext, to invoke as excuse#To shave#o scrape#o give a talking-to to; to talk to, to dress down
cao ap`High pressure#nhu cao the
cao bach`To notify
cao ban`anuscript
cao ban long`Antler glue
cao bang`Level
cao bay xa chay`o fly; to run away
cao biet`To take leave
cao binh`o feign illness; to sham sickness
cao boi`ow-boy
cao ca`Lofty, elevated
cao cao`Locust
cao cap`High-ranking, high-grade, high-class#To alarm
cao chung`To toll the knell of
cao cuong`Eminent; exalted
cao dai`Caodaism
cao dang`Higher
cao danh`(cu) Famous person; celebrity
cao day`Heaven and earth#noi ve cong on, cong duc) Heaven-high and earth-thick, immense
cao dep`Lofty and beautiful
cao diem`Height#ighest point, high peak
cao dinh`Clomax
cao do`Pitch#igh level, high degree#High-levelled, to a high degree
cao do ke`Altimetre
cao duong`(cu) Parents
cao gia`(khau ngu) Foxy, cunning, tricky#High price#ight value
cao giac`To denounce
cao giay`To be a pen-pusher
cao ho cot`Tiger bone glue
cao hoc`Master's degree
cao hoi`(cu) Ask to retire from office
cao hung`Greatly elated, highly inspired
cao huu`(cu) Ask to retire on a pension
cao ke`Sophisticated stratagem
cao khiet`Noble and pure
cao kien`Excellent idea#Sage, sagacious, far-sighted, clear-sighted
cao lao`To resign under pretence of advanced age
cao lau`Restaurant
cao loc`Antler glue
cao loi`Excuse oneself, apoligize
cao lon`Tall, tall of stature
cao luan`(cu) Essay
cao lui`Ask permission to take leave
cao luong`Kaoliang#ood fare, delicate dishes
cao ly`dia ly) Korea
cao mat`ecret report
cao minh`Gifted and clairvoyant
cao ngao`roud; arrogant
cao ngat`Dizzily high, towering
cao ngheu`Very tall and thin, very lanky
cao ngong`Toweringly tall
cao nguyen`Plateau
cao nha`Well-mannered, refined
cao nien`Elderly
cao oc`High building
cao phan tu`(hoa) Macromolecular
cao pho`To give a death notice#Death notice
cao quy`Noble, elevated, of high moral value#ife is only noble when we have an ideal
cao rao`High and dry
cao san`High-yield
cao sang`Of rank and fashion, high in rank and living
cao si`Respectable learned man
cao sieu`Sublime#nattainable
cao so`To get married late (noi ve con gai)
cao son`(cu) High mountain
cao su`Rubber#Elastic
cao ta`Thank one's way out
cao tan`High-frequency
cao tang`(cu) Bury summarily#Multi-storeyed#Veteran bonze of high virtues
cao tay`Highly able, highly capable
cao tham`High and deep; deep
cao the`High-tension
cao thi`Government notice, government announcement
cao thu`Top-classed; famous
cao thuong`High-minded, noble
cao toc`High speed
cao toi`o recognize one's fault
cao trang`Indictment
cao trao`High tide
cao tri`(cu) Notify
cao tu`To take leave
cao uy`High commissioner
cao vong`High ambition
cao vut`Immeasurably high
cao xa`Anti-aircraft gun#Far and high, unattainable
cao xanh`(cu) Sky, Heaven, Providence
cap`Cable#Hem, rim, edge#To hem, to rim, to embank#o gnaw into#Step#ank, level, class#rade#Urgent, pressing#To grant, to issue#To carry by holding against one's side, to carry under one's arms#o claw, to grip#o filch, to steal#To land, to draw up alongside
cap ba la`Bag, case#air, couple#ongs, pin##Three - bladed hairpin
cap bac`Grade, class, rank, hierarchy
cap bach`Urgent, pressing#ense, requiring immediate attention
cap bang`iploma; degree
cap bao`To send an emergency dispatch to, to notify immediately
cap ben`o board; to breth; to come on board
cap bo`Party local hierarchy
cap cao`High - ranking#ummit
cap chi`Seal with lead, lead
cap chieu`o edge a mat
cap cuu`To give first aid
cap dip`Joined together, twin
cap dit`(thong tuc) Go away
cap doi`Twin, double
cap duong`To provide relief for (old or disabled person)#Cook (in offices, army units..)
cap hieu`Stripe, badge (showing army rank)
cap ke`Nubile#To be inseparable
cap kem`Bad (eyes), bleary#nhu cap kem
cap kenh`Uneven
cap long`Set of mess-tins
cap mach`nhu cap nhiet
cap nach`Carry under one's arm
cap nhiet`To take temperature (of a patient)#linical thermometer
cap nia`xem ran cap nia
cap nong`xem ran cap nong
cap phat`To issue
cap phi`Allowance, subsidy
cap thai`(y hoc) Forceps
cap thoi`t one; Immediately
cap tien`adical
cap toc`Hairpin#Very fast, lightning
cap treo`Telepheric
cap vo chong`arried couple
cat`Common kestrel#To cut, to cut off, to cut out, to pare#Kidney#oin#uter layer (of a bamboo stem)#Sand#rain#To lift, to raise
cat ba`Calico
cat bang`Cut the inauguration band
cat binh`To raise troops
cat bo`(y hoc) Remove
cat bot`Cut down
cat buoc`Set off
cat can`(duoc) Kudzu
cat canh`Platycodon#To take off (may bay)
cat cao`Raise, lift up
cat chuc`Remove, relieve (from position), dismiss, discharge
cat co`(dung phu sau danh tu, dong tu) Exorbitant,usurious
cat con`(y hoc) Abate (said of a fit of fever)
cat cong`To trouble oneself (to do something)
cat cu`To detail, to tell off, to assign#To rule as a feud#o delegate; to detail; to tell off
cat cut`Amputate
cat dang`(cu) Concubine (whose condition is comparable to such creeper as kudzu)
cat dat`To cut out (work), to cut out work for
cat dau`Stand up
cat di`o put away; to take away
cat don`Arrange, put in order
cat giau`Hide, conceal
cat giong`Begin to sing, begin a song; raise one's voice
cat hang`o buy goods
cat hung`Good or ill (omen..)
cat ket`Cap
cat khuc`Cut into pieces
cat lan`In turn
cat loi`Cut in, interupt
cat luc`Fully stretched, strained to the utmost
cat luot`nhu cat lan
cat ma`To remove remains of a dead person (from one grave to another), to exhume and move (someone's remains) to another grave
cat may`o confection
cat mieng`(thong tuc) Open one's mouth (to speak)
cat mo`nhu cat ma
cat mot`ear relations
cat ngan`Cut short, shorten, cut down
cat ngang`Cut short
cat nghia`To make clear, to explain, to interpret
cat nha`o buy a house
cat nhac`To be hardly able to lift (one's limbs)#o promote
cat nhat`(cu) Lucky day
cat quan`To raise troops
cat quyen`Deprive somebody of his rights as a citizen
cat ruot`(Dau cat ruot)A piercing pain
cat suc`nhu cat luc
cat tang`(cu) Final inhumation
cat thuoc`o prescribe medicine
cat tieng`Begin to speak; begin to sing
cat tiet`To stick
cat tong`ardboard
cat tuong`avorable; good omen
cat tuyen`Secant
cat van`Quicksand#o interrogate; to cross-examine
cat vo`Rear; prance (of a horse)
cat xen`To truncate
cau`Areca, betel-nut#To knit (one's brows), to scowl, to frown#Ball#huttlecock (sent forth and back by kicks)#emand#ridge#nlightening experience#Colt, filly, foal#ove#entence#ine, verse#Crane#To load and unload by means of a crane#Dirt#Dirty#To be cross, to be furious#To claw#o nib, to pinch#Uncle, mother's brother#oung man#aster#ld boy, old chap#ather, dad
cau am`(ngon ngu) Articulate#Mandarin's son
cau an`Quiet-seeking, eager for a quiet life
cau ao`Small wooden pier over a pond (de giat giu, lay nu+o+'c)
cau ban`Peevish, petulant#Peevish, petulant
cau bo cau bat`Homeless and helpless, waif-like, uncared-for
cau can`Viaduct#deposits
cau canh`To entreat favours of
cau cau`Glowering, surly-looking
cau chap`To be a stickler for, to be finical about#o resent (petty mistakes..)
cau chi`Fuse#To claw and pinch each other for fun
cau chuc`Wish
cau chui`Viaduct
cau chung`egistered
cau chuyen`Story, tale, talk
cau co`To scowl
cau cong`nhu cau duong
cau cu`Sentence (noi khai quat)
cau cuu`To entreat help
cau dam`To practise long line fishing#o drag out indefinitely
cau danh`Seek after honours
cau dao`Knife-switch#To make offerings (to deity) for one's wishes to be fulfilled#o pray for rain (by worshipping deity)
cau dau`(kien tru'c) Tie-beam
cau do`Riddle
cau doi`Parallel sentences#air of wood panels (on which are inscribed parallel sentences)
cau duong`Bridges and roads
cau duyen`(dua vui) Sray for good chances in love
cau ghet`Dirty, filthy
cau giam`(tu cu) Arrest, detain, imprision
cau hang khong`Air-bridge, air-lift
cau hien`(tu cu) Seek men of great talent (to serve the country)
cau hoa`To propose a cease-fire#o play for a draw (with no ambition to win)
cau hoi`uestion; demand
cau hon`To ask for (a girl's) hand#To say a mass for someone's soul
cau keo`nhu cau cu
cau ket`To collude, to join hands, to be in league
cau khan`Pray under one's breath#To entreat, to beseech
cau kien`Building components
cau kinh`(To be) surly, (to be) gruff#To say prayers
cau lac bo`Club
cau liem`Long-handled sickle
cau long`Badminton
cau luu`(tu cu) Detain, keep in custody
cau mat`Eyeball
cau may`To try one's luck#o frown; to gather one's eyebrows
cau ne`To be a stickler for, to be finical about#o stand on ceremony, to have scruples
cau nguyen`ba me ngay dem cau nguyen cho con duoc tai qua nan khoi the mother prayed day and night for her child to get away unscathed
cau nhau`To grumble, to grunt, to growl#nhu cau nhau
cau noi`Saying; word
cau phao`Pontoon bridge
cau phong`(kien truc) Raising - piece#su hoc) Beseech investiture
cau phuong`(toan hoc) Square
cau quay`Swing-bridge
cau re`Skitter
cau rut`Cross
cau sieu`To say a mass for the peace of someone's soul (in Buddhism)
cau suon`To be in a stew
cau tai`To seek wealth
cau tao`To compose, to design, to construct#Composition, design, structure
cau tau`Wharf, quay
cau tha`Careless
cau than`To seek the alliance with
cau thang`Staircase, flight of stairs
cau thanh`To make up, to create, to compose
cau thu`Player (of football..)
cau thuc`To bind, to restrain
cau tiet`To have one's blood up
cau tieu`Latrine, toilet, water-closet
cau toan`To be a perfectionist
cau tre`Dogs and pigs; villains lost to the sense of human dignity (tieng mang)
cau treo`Suspension bridge
cau truc`Structure#To structure
cau truot`Children's slide
cau tu`Put ideas in order; make an outline (for an essay)#To pray deity for a male heir
cau tuong`Texture (of the soil...)
cau vai`Shoulder-strap#houlder backing piece
cau vat`(tho) Enjambment
cau veo`Pinch, hip#thong tuc) Nip
cau vien`To seek reinforcements
cau vinh`Seek honours
cau vong`Rainbow#Rainbow
cau xe`To claw and tear, to tear#o get at each other's throat
cau xin`Beg for, implore
caught`caught
cay`Civet, viverrine#khau ngu) Chow (as food)#Fiddler crab#Persimmon#To depend on, to rely on, to count on (someone for help..)#o rely vaingloriously on#Plough#To plough#Quail#Hot (like pepper)#ungent, stinging, pricking, acrid#et on, bent on#To prize#o steer port, to put the helm to port#To transplant#o grow rice, to farm#o culture, to grow (a culture)#Tree, plant
cay ai`Plough (the ground) loose
cay bong`Fireworks
cay bua`o farm
cay but`Pen (My), writer
cay cay`Farm work, tilling
cay chua`nhu chua cay
cay co`Vegetation (noi khai quat)
cay coi`Trees and plants, vegetation#warfed; stunted plant
cay cu`Revengeful and bent on recoup one's losses (like a bad loser)
cay cua`o force open a door
cay cuc`Bitter and humiliating#To painstakingly entreat (influential people) for a favour.#To take pains#nhu cay cuc
cay dam`Plough (the land) when it is overflowed
cay dang`Bitter
cay doc`Biting, cutting
cay du`mbrella
cay giong`(dong vat) Zibet
cay huong`(dong vat) Musk - cat
cay moc cua`(dong vat) Crab - eating mongoose
cay nen`ax candle
cay neu`Tet pole, lunar New Year pole (set up in the courtyard of every house in the country)
cay nghiet`Harsh, very severe
cay nuoc`Waterspout
cay se`(cung viet) cay xe Stingingly hot
cay so`Milestone#ilometer
cay the`o rely on one's position or standing
cay thit`(thong tuc) Good - for - nothing
cay viet`Pen
cay xang`Filling station, petrol station
cay xanh`Verdure
cha`Father, dad#amn, curse#Grilled chopped meat, grilled chopped fish, grilled chopped shrimp, shish kabab#ha ca (grilled chopped fish) is a kind of time-consuming and meticulously prepared food. To enjoy it, you will have on the table various auxiliary dishes: A small bowl of tasty Mam Tom (shrimp paste) mixed with a few drops of rice liquor and lemon juice, then carefully stirred with some added slices of hot chilly. A plate of roasted groundnuts, which are a rich brown colour following the removal of their flimsy covers#ccompanying the two dishes will be a plate of pure white rice vermicelli and a plate of spicy vegetables. Finally, a stove with a pan of boiling oil on its top will be placed on the table. You will open the grilles to allow pieces of grilled fish to drop into the oil. Things are done in this way to ensure that connoisseurs receive piping hot food#Promiscuous#To scrape, to crush
cha anh`Elders
cha bu`nhu chang bu
cha ca`(dia phuong) Bishop
cha cha`Oho! aha!
cha chot`Half-serious half-joking
cha chu`Elder, person belonging to one's parents' generation
cha co`Clergymen, clergy
cha dap`To trample on
cha de`Father, one's own father
cha do dau`he Godfather
cha ghe`tepfather
cha gio`nhu cha ran
cha la`(khau ngu) It is because#Date, date-palm
cha me`Parents
cha nuoi`Adoptive father, foster-father
cha ong`nhu ong cha
cha ran`Fried crab roll, fried meat roll#lthough it ranks among Vietnam's special dishes, Cha Ran (or Cha Gio) is very easy to prepare. Consequently, it has long been a preferred food on special occasions such as Tet and other family festivities. Ingredients for Cha Gio comprise lean minced pork, sea crabs or unshelled shrimps, two kinds of edible mushroom - Nam Huong and Moc Nhi - dried onion, duck eggs, pepper, salt and seasoning. All are mixed thoroughly before being wrapped with transparent rice paper into small rooms. These rolls are fried in boiling oil. Pieces of freshly fried spring rolls, dipped in spicy, sweet and sour fish sauce and can offer connoisseurs a tasty hot food to be eaten with a variety of pickles including slices of papaya and lettuce, cucumber and other spicy vegetables
cha so`icar
cha vien`Quenelle forcemeat ball
cha xat`To rub time and again
cha xu`Vicar
chac`Fork#amboo plaited cord#nhu ghe#Solid, firm; secure, steady#ure, surely#To click (one's tongue)#tu cam#ell#xem)  doi  chac
chac chan`Be in a stable position, have a stable job#Reliable, reliably solid#efinitely#To be cock-sure
chac da`To have a feeling of fullness (in one's stomach)
chac han`Surely, certainly
chac lep`To be half trustful half suspicious (of someone's solvency)
chac mam`xem mam
chac nich`Firm
chach`Loach
chai`Bottle chai ba a 1/3 liter bottle#Callosity, callus, corn (o chan tay)#Callous#ompact, hardened#Casting-net#To fish with a casting-net#dung phu sau danh tu, han che trong mot so to hop)To fish#Lean-to#To brush
chai bai`[With] legs spread out
chai bo`Magnum
chai chuot`To spruce up, to smarten#Well-groomed, spruce#noi ve van chuong) Polished
chai dan`Hardened
chai dau`o comb; to brush
chai luoi`Casting and other fishing-nets; fishing trade
cham`(To be) assiduous, (to be) diligent#to be) assiduous in one's studies, in one's work#To diligently look after#Acupuncture#To sting, to prick#o light, to kindle#Dot, point#ull stop, period#To put a dot, to make a dot; to put a full stop, to make a full stop#Occipital#Slow#To run with big thread#To touch#o encounter#o hurt#o carve#With sudden haste#nil, Indigo plant#czema#to sop up. to dab
cham bap`Warm
cham biem`To satirize
cham bon`To cultivate, to tend
cham cham`Fixedly#Nhin cham cham#o look fixedly at#Rather slow#Stipple
cham chap`Slow#With utter partiality#nhu cham cham
cham chi`Assiduous, laborious
cham chich`To taunt, to sneer
cham chim`Intaglio
cham choc`To sneer, to taunt, to indulge in personalities against
cham chu`Concentrating, with concentration
cham chuoc`To adjust, to balance, to allow for#o lessen the requirement of#o forgive
cham chut`To nurse
cham coc`Clink glasses
cham cong`To mark work-points (o cac hop tac xa nong nghiep)
cham cu`(tu cu) Dead before the mother's abstinence period after childbirth#said of a baby)
cham cuu`Acupuncture and ignipuncture; acupuncture
cham dut`To bring to an end, to terminate, to end
cham het`To put a final stop to (a writing)
cham hoi`Question mark
cham lo`To give one's mind to improving
cham lung`Ellipsis
cham mat`To meet face to face, to face
cham mut`To make money from rake-offs
cham ngo`To pay a plighting visit
cham ngon`Saying, saw
cham noc`To touch (someone) to the raw, to cut (someone) to the quick
cham nom`To care for
cham pha`To sketch
cham phan`Secure apart, stake out a part (of a legacy..)
cham phay`Semi-colon
cham phet`nhu cham phay
cham rai`(noi ve dong tac) Deliberate, leisurely
cham soc`To attend on (upon), to care for
cham than`Exclamation mark
cham tien`Lagging behind, underdeveloped
cham tran`To meet face to face, to face
cham tre`Tardy
cham tro`To carve
cham vam`Frowning
cham via`To bring bad luck on, to put a jinx on
chan`(dung han che trong mot vai to hop) To give alms, to give relief#Blanket#To tend, to graze, to pasture, to herd#To breed, to raise (noi ve tam)#Foot, leg#osition as a member#Larder, pantry, cupboard#Round#ven#The fourth sign of the eight-sign figure#To be satiated with, to be tired of#o be disgusted with#Dull#To block, to stop, to intercept#To souse (liquid food) on rice chan canh to souse soup on rice#To stitch#o scald, to blanch#o dress down#chan ca Game of cards with each hand consisting of pairs#arrier#To block, to bar, to obstruct, to stop, to hold back#o partition#nhu chan
chan an`Lose appetite
chan ap`o oppress
chan ban`To give alms to the poor
chan benh`To diagnose a disease, to diagnose
chan binh`o diagnose; to examine a disease
chan bu`Entirely satiated with
chan bun`Mudguard
chan chan`Brimming over, overflowing, teeming#Rather dull, dullish
chan chat`xem chat#(noi ve giong noi) Jangling#(noi ve van chuong doi nhau) Perfectly symmetrical (idea for idea, word for word)
chan chau`Saw - teeth
chan che`More than enough
chan chet`Boring to death
chan chi`Simple-minded and truthful
chan chi hat bot`Very simplemimded and truthful
chan chieu`Blanket and mat#(nghia bong) Conjugal life
chan chinh`To correct, to dress, to reorganize#True, genuine, authentic
chan chu`To waver, to hum and haw, to dilly-dally
chan chua`How annoying!#xem chua chan
chan chuong`(To be) embittered, (to be) weary
chan dat`Barefoot#To herd, to tend#o tend, to mind
chan dau`Block (check) an advance
chan doan`To diagnose, to make a diagnosis
chan doi`To be tired of living
chan dong`To produce a stir
chan dung`Portrait#To stop short#to arrest; to cheek, to stop
chan ghet`To dislike, to disrelish
chan gia`Cork - leg, ammunition leg.#sinh vat) Pseudopod
chan gia tri`True worth
chan giay`Paper - weight
chan gio`(Pig's) trotters
chan goi`Blanket and pillow; bed and board; connubiality
chan hau`To cut off the enemy's retreat
chan hoa`To be bathed in#(noi ve tinh cam, loi song) Easily mix with, to be in harmony with
chan hong`To muzzle, to impose silence on (somebody)
chan hung`To make prosper, to make prevail
chan khong`Vacuum
chan khop`(dong vat) Arthopod
chan kinh`Jewel
chan le`Odd-even game
chan ly`Truth
chan mach`(y hoc, cu) Diagnose by feeling the pulse (of a patient)
chan may`(van chuong) Line of horizon, horizon
chan nan`Disheartened, dispirited
chan ngan`Utterly discontented
chan ngat`Boring, dull, wearisome, tedious
chan ngay`Be fed up with
chan nhu`(ton giao) Eternal truth
chan nuoi`To breed, to raise
chan phe`Disgusting, ikksome, humdrum
chan phuong`Plain
chan quy`Curved leg, console
chan ret`Centipede-foot-shaped
chan song`Bar, pale
chan tai`Have one's ears jaded by#True talent
chan tam`True heart; sincerity
chan tay`Limbs#nhu tay chan#To stay the hands of
chan tha`To graze, to pasture
chan thanh`eartfelt; loyal; sincere
chan that`(noi ve con nguoi) Frank, candid, truthful#noi ve nghe thuat) True to life
chan thuc`nhu chan that
chan thuong`Trauma
chan tinh`Ogress (trong truyen co tich)#Utter sincerity, heartiness#Very sincere, heartfelt
chan trang`Plebeian, commoner
chan tri`(y hoc, cu) Diagnose and traet
chan troi`Horizon#rospect,vista# want to send word to someone at the ends of the world, Do you remember our pledge when hearing the rain fall?
chan truyen`Orthodox
chan tu`To be a true believer (bonze, nun..)#Vibrator#Wires (of an aerial)
chan tuong`True nature, cloven hoof
chan vac`Tripodal (like the three legs of a cauldron), troika-like
chan van`Oodles of, oceans of
chan vit`Screw-propeller
chan xac`(it dung) Sincerity, truth
chan xich`Chain guard
chan y vien`ispensary
chang`Large-bladed chisel#oung gentleman#rue love (used by women)#Stage, halt; hop (duong bay)#To fasten, to bind, to tie securely#o pinch, to use without permission#To stand astride#nhu giang#Not any#Surely; isn't it, is it, doesn't it, does it.#ot at all
chang ai`Nobody, none
chang bang`Would rather
chang bao gio`Never
chang bao lau nua`Soon, before long
chang bo`Not to be worth-while
chang bu`Unlike
chang can`Not to care, not to need
chang chang`(noi ve troi nang) Blazing
chang cheo`Criss-cross
chang chi`At last
chang chit`To interlace
chang cu`Not necessarily
chang de`Not to expect
chang gi`For all that
chang han`Namely, for example, for instance
chang hang`To straddle
chang he`Never
chang he gi`Not to matter, be none the worse
chang hiu`ree frog
chang la`nhu cha la
chang le`There is no reason why
chang luoi`o spead; a net
chang man`o hang a mosquito net
chang may`Unfortunately
chang ne`Not to mind
chang nhung`Not only
chang nua`Even of#Otherwise
chang qua`Only, just, that is all there is to it
chang quan`Not to mind (difficulty.)
chang ra gi`Uninteresting, dull, dry#ood - for - nothing, worthless
chang sao`Not to matter
chang tha`Better, would rather
chang trach`No wonder, little wonder
chang trai`[Young] fellow, lad
chang vang`Twilight, dusk
chang vua`No less terrible
chanh`Head, chief (as opposite to pho)#prig, twig#Lemon#Open wide (one's mouth...)#To be affected by some melancholy feeling
chanh an`Tribunal president
chanh banh`(dia phuong) Wide open
chanh choi`Ill-natured, cantankerous (said of children)
chanh chu khao`Chairman of the examiners' board
chanh chua`Sharp-tongued, tart, sour
chanh com`[A variety of] deep green, small lemon
chanh dao`[A variety of] lemon with rosy pulp
chanh hoi`Speaker of the rural assembly (o Bac bo, thoi thuoc Phap)
chanh long`(To be) affected, (to be) moved
chanh pham`rincipal author of a crime
chanh su`Chief envoy (of a feudal mission)#nhu cong su
chanh tong`Canton chief
chanh van phong`Chief of the Secretariat
chanh yen`(thuc vat) cung nhu thanh yen Citron
chao`Gruel, soup#Pan#Rope#Salad of pig's underdone sliced skin and grilled rice flour and aromatic herbs#Soya cheese#To dip in water and wash by rocking#o rock, to swing#Oh#To greet, to salute#o solicit
chao am`Fish gruel
chao dao`Stagger, waver
chao den`xem chao
chao doi`To be brought into the world
chao don`To welcome, to warmly greet
chao hang`Canvass
chao hoa`Plain rice gruel, plain rice soup
chao hoi`To pass the time of day
chao mao`Red-whispered bulbul
chao moi`Solicit
chao mung`To extend a welcome to, to do in honour of
chao oi`Heigh ho, oh dear, alas
chao quay`Finger - shaped soufle' batter
chao rao`Tumultuous
chap`Moment, while, spell, short period#Sty, stye#To patch up, to piece out, to piece up, to connect#To give some handicap#o defy#o accept, to grant#o resent, to have a grudge against#Twelfth month, last month#di voi gio tet) Ancestors' worship#nhu chap#To fasten together, to twist together#o put in direct contact (electric wire); to tangle (a watch hairspring..)
chap but`To put down in writing (the ideas of a community)
chap cha chap choang`xem chap choang
chap cha chap choi`xem chap choi
chap cha chap chon`xem chap chon
chap chinh`To assume power
chap choang`Half-light, twilight#nsteady, tottering
chap choi`To fly with a rolling motion#o flicker#o wink leeringly
chap chon`To doze#o flicker
chap chung`Toddling
chap hanh`To execute, to implement
chap kinh`To keep to the usual code of conduct
chap kinh tong quyen`xem quyen
chap ne`nhu chap nhat
chap nhan`To accept, to agree to
chap nhat`To be a stickler for#To glean, to scrape together#To resent (petty mistakes..)
chap thuan`To grant, to agree to
chap toi`Dusk, nightfall
chap va`To patch up
chat`Clang#Acrid#noi ve am thanh) Clanging#Great-grandchild#ame of skill with sticks and a ball#To decant#Substance, matter#uality#To heap, to pile#Tight, narrow#vercrowded, crammed, packed#To cut, to fell, to chop, to shatter#Secure, close, tight#nuoc chat Brine (from which salt is got)#alt-pond
chat beo`Lipid
chat bop`To stint oneself in
chat cha chat chuong`xem chat chuong#xem chat chuong
chat chay`Inflammable
chat che`Close
chat chiu`To nurse#o save every amount of
chat choi`Cramped
chat chua`umulate; to amass
chat chuong`Inconsistent in words, erratic, unreliable#Unsteady, unstable, cranky
chat dam`Nitrogenous matter, protein
chat deo`Plastic
chat doc`oxic; poison
chat dot`Fuel
chat hep`Narrow, cramped
chat khi`as
chat khoang`Mineral matter
chat kich thich`timulant
chat lieu`Material
chat long`Liquid
chat luong`Quality
chat luu`Fluid
chat no`Explosive
chat phac`Simple, rustic
chat ran`Solid
chat tai`ar#iercing; strident.
chat van`To question
chat vat`(noi ve lam viec gi) Toilsome, tough, strenuous, requiring a lot of exertion
chat xam`Grey matter
chat xit`Shockingly acrid
chau`Basin, pot#Continent#Mountain district (thoi phong kien va thuoc Phap)#(ket hop han che) Tear#To huddle together#Grandchild, grandson, granddaughter#ephew, niece; firstcousin once or twice removed (used for addressing persons of the above said relatives' age or by them when addressing elderly people as self-appellation)#hild, children#To frown, to knit (one's brows)#To purse, to pout#nhu chau#nhu chau chau
chau bau`Valuables (noi khai quat)
chau chang`Racophorus
chau chat`Grandchildren and great-grandchildren; posterity
chau chau`Grasshopper
chau chuc`Soiree with sing-song girls, soiree with geishas#ound, bout, session#eriod, season##To attend upon (a mandarin..)#o cool one's heels
chau chuoc`Hylarana
chau dau`Wife of one's grandson#ife of one's nephew
chau dich ton`Eldest son of one's eldest son
chau mai`lo chau mai A loop-hole
chau may`o frown; to knit the brows
chau ngoai`Child of one's daughter, maternal grandchild
chau noi`Child of one's son, paternal grandchild
chau re`Husband of one's grandaughter#usband of one's niece
chau ria`To look on (a game of cards..), to kibitz
chau tho`Delta
chau troi`o die; to pass away
chau van`Chant sung for a trance
chay`Head louse#To grill and ground#Later#ong#To flow, to run#o melt, to leak#To run#Vegetarian#lain (without salt or meat)#dung phu sau dong tu khi noi ve cay trong) Without manure, without fertilizer#Service (for the peace of some dead person's soul)#xem ca chay#estle#ell-stick#xem ca chay#urned rice (at bottom of a pot)#ombustion#To burn, to blaze#o parch#xem tray
chay bung`Blaze up, burst into flame[s]
chay cho`To huckster
chay chot`To solicit
chay chua`To treat with every possible means (a seriously ill person)
chay coi`(thong tuc) To reason absurdly and obstinately, to quibble
chay den`Carbonized
chay dien`(y hoc,khau ngu) Electrotherapy
chay dua`To race
chay giay`(tu cu) Work as a messenger
chay hieu`(tu cu, thong tuc) Play a secondary role, play second fiddle
chay kinh`(van chuong, cu) Bell-stick, wooden bell-hammer
chay lang`To throw up the game and go bankrupt
chay loan`Seek safety from the war, flee from the war
chay luoi`xem tray luoi
chay mat`o run away
chay mau`Bleed
chay quanh`Be somewhere about
chay ra`Run in
chay rong`Roam about, run about
chay rua`To deliquesce#eliquesce.
chay sem`Licked up by the flame; singed
chay tang`Mourning-avoiding
chay thay`luoi chay thay Very lazy
chay theo`Run after
chay thoat`o have a narrow escape
chay tien`To go in search for money#o bribe, to pay a bribe
chay tinh`Strictly austere (as a Buddhist)
chay tui`(thong tuc) Cleaned out
chay ua`Rush, stream
chay vay`To move heaven and earth
chay viec`Go in search of a job, look for a job
chay vut`Run like the wind
che`Mourning#To mock at, to make fun of#o prepare#o manufacture#o invent (a new thing)#o pour#Spikelet#To bifurcate, to divide into two branches#Tea#weetened porridge (made of glutinous rice, bean..)#To hide, to put a cover on#To make little of, to run down#To split, to cleave#nhu choe
che bai`To speak scornfully of, to disparage
che bien`To process
che chan`nhu chan che
che chen`To feast
che cho`To give cover to, to protect
che cuoi`To speak scornfully of and sneer at
che day`To cover#o cover up, to smother up
che dinh`To institutionalize#Institution
che do`System, order, regime#egulation, regimen
che duc`To restrain one's passions and desires, to practise continence
che giau`To hide, to conceal, to shelter
che gieu`To ridicule
che hat`Tea flower buds
che hoe`Plain, plain as a pike-staff, unambiguous
che huong`Flavoured tea, scented tea
che la`Tea and cigarettes, baksheesh, bribe
che lap`To cover
che man`Brown tea
che ngu`To control, to dominate
che nhao`To mock at
che nu`nhu che hat
che pham`Finished product
che phu`To cover
che tac`o create; to invent
che tao`To manufacture
che trach`To speak scornfully of and criticize (reproach)
chech`Slanted, a little oblique#To be slanted, to be off
chech choac`Out of line and uneven, unorderly
chech choang`ipsy; squiffy
chem`To cut (with a sword..), to guillotine#o sting, to stick it on#o wedge; to pack
chem che`Imposing
chem chen`nhu chem che
chem chep`nhu chem chep#xem chep
chem giet`To massacre, to slaughter
chen`(noi ve quan ao) Short and closefitting#Cup#mall bowl#mount of galenical medicine made up in one prescription#To have a booze#Spikelet#To choke, to block#To chock, to make fast with#o cut in deliberately, to block#Choke#To elbow, to jostle#o intersperse, to mix
chen chuc`To hustle
chen com`owl of rice
chen ep`To block, to keep back
chen lan`To jostle (someone) out, to elbow (someone) out#nhu chen ep
chenh`Tilted#neven, of different levels
chenh choang`Staggering, unsteady, tottery#Tipsy, squiffy
chenh lech`Uneven, unequal, of different levels
chenh mang`To neglect, to slack off in (one's duty)
chenh venh`Tottery, tottering
cheo`Diagonal, bias, slanting, oblique#rossed, crosswise, crisscross#Diagonal cloth#Java mouse-deer#ine (paid by a girl who married outside her village)#To row#Oar#raditional operetta#Cheo (Traditional operetta) is an original synthesis of folk songs, dances and narration. The words of the play are imbued with the lyricism of folk songs, proverbs and popular sayings. A Cheo play could be put on stage in a large theatre, but it also could be performed successfully on one or two bed mats spread in the middle of a communal house with a cast of only three: a hero, a heroine and a clown. The clown in a Cheo play seems to be a supporting role, but actually he or she is very important to the performance. The clowns present a comic portrayal of social life, with ridiculous and satirical words and gestures they reduce the audience to tears of laughter. The national Cheo repertoire includes among others Truong Vien, Kim Nhan, Luu Binh Duong Le and Quan Am Thi Kinh, which are considered treasures of the traditional stage
cheo ao`orner of a coat
cheo beo`Drongo
cheo cheo`Rather oblique
cheo chong`To row and punt#o buffet with difficulties
cheo cuoi`Marriage customs (theo tuc le cu)
cheo go`Diagonal cloth, twill
cheo keo`To invite with insistence
cheo leo`High and dangerous
cheo queo`Curled up, coiled up
chep`xem ca chep#To copy#o record
chep mieng`To chirp (with one's lips)
chet`To choke, to block, to strangle#o run over#Close-fitting#chet tay Amount that can be hold within the two hands cupped together#ead, to die
chet cha`nhu bo me
chet choc`To die
chet chua`My goodness!
chet dieng`To be stupefied to insensibility (with pain..)
chet dung`To be transfixed (with terror..)
chet duoi`To drown
chet giac`To lose consciousness, to fall into a dead faint, to swoon
chet met`To be over head and ears in love, to be captivated
chet tuoi`(noi ve nguoi, dong vat dang song binh thuong) To die an instant death
chet xac`(noi ve muc do lam viec) To death
chi`Elder sister, first cousin (daughter of one's either parent's elder brother or sister)#(Form of address for young women or women about or above one's age, or young women younger than one)#Head louse#ill, ambition#(di voi tu) To, down to#Utterly, extremely#Lead#inker#Limb, leg#ine of descent#xem chu_chi#To spend (money from a fund, budget), to pay out, to disburse#Thread, yarn#oyal decree, royal ordinance#eft
chi ac`ery wicked
chi bang`Would better
chi bao`To recommend, to advise
chi bo`Cell (of party)#ell
chi cha chi chat`xem chi chat
chi chat`Clanging, with a clang
chi chet`To death
chi chiet`To nag
chi chit`Serried, tense
chi choe`Strident gibber
chi cong`Very just
chi cuc`Branch
chi dan`To direct, to instruct
chi dao`To supply concrete guidance
chi diem`Branch (of a firm)#To pinpoint, to inform#Informer
chi dinh`To appoint, to assign
chi doan`ranch
chi du`Royal decrees and ordinances, royal written orders and proclamations
chi dung`To spend money
chi em`Sisters (young women fellow members of the same community.)
chi giao`To counsel
chi hang`Phoebe, the moon
chi hieu`ery pious
chi huong`Sense of purpose
chi huy`To command, to conduct, to direct#Commander, commanding officer, conductor, director
chi huy pho`Second in command, deputy commander, deputy director
chi huy truong`Commander, commanding officer (of an army unit)
chi it`At least, at the very least
chi khi`Strong will
chi li`Particular, minute
chi ly`hi ly
chi nam`xem kim chi nam
chi nguyen`Wish
chi nguyen quan`Volunteer, volunteer troop
chi phi`To spend#Spending, expenditure, outlay
chi phieu`heque ; cheek
chi phoi`To control, to rule, to govern
chi ro`o denote; to enumerate
chi si`Strong-willed scholar (who upheld a just cause)
chi so`Index
chi tay`ines of the hand
chi thi`To instruct#Instructions
chi thien`ban chi thien To fire in the air
chi thiet`Very intimate, very close
chi thu`Interested in and devoted to
chi tiet`Detail#art (of a machine)#Detailed
chi tieu`Target, norm, quota#To spend
chi tinh`Wholehearted
chi ton`Most venerated
chi trich`To criticize, to censure
chi tro`To point (with the fingers)
chi tu`Deadly, to death
chi tuyen`Tropic
chi ve`To direct, to advise, to show in detail
chi vien`To assist, to support
chi yeu`ost important
chia`Fishing fork, fish lance#To fish with a fish lance (fishing fork)#o point at, to direct, to train upon#Key, key-like thing#To stretch out, to extend, to show, to produce#o jut out, to protrude#To divide, to split, to distribute, to share
chia cat`To divide, to partition, to isolate
chia khoa`Key key
chia li`nhu chia ly
chia lia`To part, to separate
chia ly`o disunite; to dissociate
chia phoi`nhu chia ly
chia re`To divide, to split the ranks of, to drive a wedge between
chia se`To share
chia tay`To say good-bye#o go shares
chia voi`Wagtail (chim)
chia xe`To split up
chich`To lance, to tap#o sting#o inject
chich ngua`o inoculate; to get immunisation shot
chiec`A (unit of)#Single
chiec bong`onely shadow
chiem`Summer rice#(noi ve thoc) Of the fifth lunar month, summer#ut of season, late#To appropriate, to occupy#o make up
chiem bai`o adore
chiem bao`To dream, to see in a dream
chiem chiep`To cheep, to chirp
chiem cu`To occupy
chiem doat`To appropriate
chiem dong`To station occupying troops in, to occupy
chiem giu`o with hold
chiem huu`To hold, to own
chiem linh`To control
chiem nghiem`To be experienced in observing (something)
chiem nguong`To gaze with veneration#o pay homage to the memory of
chiem tinh hoc`Astrology
chien`Pagoda#To fry#Animal hair cloth (used for blankets and upholstery)#War#Bully, clinking
chien bai`To be defeated, to be vanquished
chien bao`War dress
chien binh`Combatant
chien chien`Skylark (chim)
chien cong`Feat of arms
chien cu`War material
chien cuoc`War situation, war complexion
chien dau`To fight, to combat, to struggle, to militate
chien dich`Campaign, movement
chien ham`Warship
chien hao`Combat trench, fighting trench
chien huu`Comrade-in-arms
chien khu`Strategic war theatre#ase
chien loi pham`War booty
chien luoc`Strategy#Strategic, strategical
chien luy`System of defence works
chien si`Man, soldier#ighter
chien su`Fighting, hostilities
chien thang`To win victory over, to triumph over#Victory
chien thuat`Tactics#ine, slogan and methods of action#Tactical
chien thuyen`Warship, gunboat
chien tich`Exploit of arms, feat of arms
chien tran`Battle, engagement
chien tranh`War, warfare
chien truong`Battlefield, theatre of war
chien tuyen`Fighting line, front line, front
chien xa`Combat vehicle
chieng`Gong#Gongs were found in Vietnam in the Bronze Age (Dong Son culture from 2000 to 3500 years ago). Gongs were cast in bronze, an alloy of copper, zinc and lead. Gongs are used as a musical instrument by most ethnic groups in Vietnam. Gongs are frequently mentioned in Highland songs, and its music displays its contemplative nature. Highlanders believe that when gong music is played, there is an encounter between the human and spirit worlds, between the worlds of the living and the dead. In real life, the gong is closely associated with each stage of a lifespan. In the ceremony of blowing the ear for a newborn child, the sound of a gong serves to declare the offical acceptance of a new community member. When he or she is old enough to get married, in the ceremony of exchanging necklace, the gong sound is a reminder to the new couple to observe family and community traditions. The sound is so deep that it seems to ring only once in one's life. When beasts are destroying crops or a war rages, the gong seems to urge young people to dash to the battlefield and struggle for the survival of the community. If the gong sounds hilarious and fast, it heralds a victory or the ceremony of killing buffalo. When the gong sounds slow, sinister and heavy, then it is the news of a death. The gong is warm in a night of rest or around a fire with a pot of wine, an indication of a good harvest when young people gather to sing and dance and tell of their love#hen the gong sounds from the communal house, it can be heard all over the mountain and forest as a call for the young men to return to the communal house. When an old man passes away, the gong echoes its farewell. Virtually, all Western Highland and Long Range tribes have their own gongs. There are various types: Cong (with a nipple) and Chieng (without one) and there are also different sizes depending on the tribe, each region with its own regulations. It would not be an exaggeration to say that the gong is one of the main instruments in the orchestras of the Western Highland (Tay Nguyen) and Long Range (Truong Son) tribes, used in festivals such as the welcoming of a victory, killing buffalo, forgetting a tomb, and welcoming a good harvest. There are three pieces: Juar, Trum and Vang. Juar has an accelerating tempo revealing the majestic heroism of the victory; Trum (accompanied by a shield dance) expresses the hard but brave fight of the soldiers; and Vang, with a slow tempo, tells of sorrow, grief and regret felt for fallen soldiers. Gongs are named differently according to their size, register, timbre and function: Mother Gong, Father Gong, Older Sister Gong, Younger Sister Gong, or high pitch, medium pitch and low pitch. Hands or sticks are used to beat the gong. Sticks can be wrapped with cloth and/or rubber and a gong can be held by hand, put on the thigh or hung on a frame when played. Researchers all agree that of all the gongs of the ethnic groups, the Ba Na gong is the most majestic, imposing, romantic and echoing; the Gia Rai gong is the most solid, echoing and accelerated. The gong is an instrument of a philosophical and contemplative character. Closely associated with other art forms like singing and dancing, they can also be witty, cheerful and romantic. They are not only the property of the ethnic groups of the Western Highlands and the Long Range, but also bear unique and cherished value for Vietnamese culture as a whole. ()
chiep`xem chiem chiep
chiet`To pour (part of some liquid from one vessel into another)#o extract#o deduct, to stop#noi ve dan, khau) To nip in#o layer (in horticulture)
chiet khau`Discount
chiet quang`Refringent
chiet trung`To practise eclectism#Eclectic
chiet tu`Phep chiet tu Graphology
chiet xuat`To extract
chiet yeu`xem bat chiet yeu
chieu`(dung trong van hanh chi'nh) To take into account, to consider#Afternoon, evening#irection#ide, dimension#Royal proclamation#edge mat#To radiate, to expose to (rays)#o project#xem co chieu#To wash down#o recruit#Left
chieu an`To call to surrender#o call the people to return to a normal life after a war
chieu bai`Signboard, label
chieu binh`To recruit troops
chieu bong`Cinema, movies
chieu chi`Royal proclamations and ordinances (noi khai quat)
chieu chuong`o coddle; to pamper
chieu co`To make allowance for, to consider, to grant privileges to#o condescend, to deign
chieu dai`To receive, to entertain
chieu dai so`Guests' house
chieu dien`To X-ray, to roentgenize
chieu hien`(noi ve vua chua ngay xua) To recruit talents
chieu hoi`"Open arms" policy
chieu hon`To call up the soul (of a dead person)
chieu khan`isa
chieu le`For form's sake
chieu mo`o recruit; to enlist
chieu y`o defer; to yield
chim`Bird#To sink
chim chich`Tailorbird, warbler
chim choc`Birds
chim chuot`To make love to, to woo
chim dam`To be sunk in
chim gay`nhu cu gay
chim muong`Birds and beasts, animals
chim nghim`To sink deep
chim ngoi`Turtle dove
chim ri`Munia
chim sau`Flowerpecker
chim se`xem se
chim xanh`Pimp, pander
chin`ine, ninth
chin cay`Ripened on the tree
chin chan`Mature
chin me`Whitlow
chin moi`hinh anh) hell; hades
chin muoi`Ripe
chin nhu`verdone
chin suoi`Nether regions, hades
chinh`Correct#To correct#o lecture, to give a dressing down to, to castigate#Main#ust, righteous#Terracotta jar#xem ca chinh
chinh bien`Political upheaval, putsch
chinh chen`Grand, stately
chinh chien`To fight a war
chinh chuyen`Virtuous
chinh dang`Legitimate#Political party
chinh don`To dress, to reorganize, to set right
chinh hinh`Orthopaedy#thuat chinh hinh 
chinh huan`To reform, to re-educate
chinh luu`To rectify
chinh ly`eadjust; to arrange again
chinh phat`To mount a punitive expedition (against a smaller nation)
chinh phu`Government, cabinet#Warrior#Warrior's wife
chinh phuc`To conquer#o win, to win over
chinh quy`Xem chinh qui
chinh quy hoa`Xem chinh qui hoa
chinh quyen`State power, regime, government, administration
chinh sach`Policy
chinh ta`Spelling, dictation
chinh te`Correct
chinh the`(Political) regime#Perfect whole
chinh thuc`Official#ull-fledged
chinh thuc hoa`To officialize
chinh tri`Politics
chinh tri gia`Politician
chinh tri pham`Political prisoner, state prisoner
chinh tri vien`Political instructor (at company or battalion level)
chip`to keep to tighten
chit`Great-great-great-grandchild#To wind round the head#noi ve do mac) To fit closely#o stitch tighter#o stop, to fill in#To choke, to choke up, to block#Tight
chit chit`To squeak
chit khan`o wrap a turban around one's head
chiu`To sustain, to bear, to accept
chiu chit`To twitter, to cheep
chiu dau hang`o give in; to cave in
chiu duc`To accept male (noi ve suc vat cai)
chiu dung`To stand
chiu kho`To take pains
chiu nhuc`o pocket an affront
chiu phep`To count oneself completely powerless
chiu tang`To go into mourning (for someone)
chiu thua`o yield; to give up
chiu toi`o plead guilty
chiu trong`To accept cock (noi ve gia cam mai)
cho`Cur, ass, donkey#og spaniel boxer saluki#Do not#nhu chu#Market, market-place#Parashorea (cay, go)#Seat, place, room, space, point, extent#Steamer (for steaming sticky rice)#To direct one's mouth to#To give#To transport, to carry, to ferry#To wait#Xem cui cho
cho bien`Seal, sea-dog
cho biet`o tell; to make known
cho bua`Market
cho chet`Damned (tieng rua)#o await death
cho chi`nhu phai chi
cho chieu`Market at its closing
cho chong`Xem chong cho
cho den`Black market
cho deu`Arrant cur
cho doi`To wait
cho hay`(dung o dau cau) As one can infer, in conclusion
cho he`Not once
cho ke`Then that is all there is to it, then there is nothing more to add
cho khach`o carry passengers
cho ma`Dogs, curs and cads
cho muon`o loan; to lend
cho nen`Therefore, hence
cho phep`o permit; to allow; to authorize
cho phien`Kermis, fair
cho san`Hunting dog#unning dog
cho soi`Wolf
cho troi`Flea market
cho vo`Derelict, desolate
cho xem`o wait and see
choa`glaring
choa mat`laring
choac`o become dwarged#o open wide#nhu xoac
choai`(thuong noi ve chan) To stand astride#o slope toward the foot#Support (for climbers)#Teenage, not fully grown#To dive, to stretch oneself to the full (with arms extended along head)
choan`To occupy#o encroach upon, to usurp
choang`Shocked into a daze (blindness, deafness..)#wanky#To embrace, to clasp#o put round#o be startled into (doing something)#To strike with a clang#o be looked together in a fierce battle, to beat#Xem sang choang
choang lon`Swanky and shining
choang oc`eafening
choang vang`Dizzy, giddy, dazed
choat`Stunted, shrivelled
choc`Impetigo#oment, instant, while#To poke, to thrust, to prick#o irritate, to rouse
choc choc`From time to time, now and then
choc gheo`To tease
choc gian`o rage; to irritate
choc lat`A short while
choc let`To tickle, to titillate
choc nua`resently; in a few minutes
choc tiet`To stick
choc tuc`To rouse, to irritate, to pin-prick
choe` big jar#Big-bellied jar#nhu loe#Bright and translucent#hrill, strident
choet`Non choet Green, young and inexperienced
choi`Broom#rush#Dazzling#hrill#hooting, stabbing#Rudimentary mirador, watch-tower#To shoot up, to emerge with difficulty#Shoot, bud#To clink, to bump#o front, to confront#o fight, to make fight#o be strictly symmetrical (of style)#To deny#o refuse, to turn down#Unbearable, intolerable, insupportable#To play#o resist; to oppose; to support
choi ac`o play a nasty trick
choi boi`To be friends#o indulge in play#o play at
choi cai`To refute, to deny
choi canh`atch tower
choi choi`Plover (chim)#Xem choi
choi chu`To play on words, to make a pun
choi di`o frequent prostitutes
choi dua`To play
choi ga`Cock-fighting, cock-fight
choi gai`To frequent prostitutes
choi loa`Blindingly dazzling
choi loi`Resplendent
choi mat`o dazzle the eyes#azzilng
choi ngang`To act unconventionally#o commit adultery
choi re`ucker
choi treo`To keep company with older (wealthier) people
choi troi`To give oneself airs, to play the high and mighty
choi tu`Nhu tu choi
choi voi`Lonely, solitary#To reach up one's hands repeatedly
chom`Grove, thicket, tuft#mall hamlet#To bud, to begin#To cover over#To pinch#To prance, to spring#o emerge#Top#op tuft of hair (left on shaven head of young children)
chom choe`Imposing (sitting position)
chom chom`Craggy, rugged, bristling#Rambutan# rambutan tree has a broad foliage and many branches. The tree yields fruit at the beginning of the rainy season in the southern provinces. The#hom fruit season finishes at the end of the rainy season (from May to#ctober). The skin of the fruit is tough, thick and hairy. Its pulp is transparent white and tender, and has a cool sweet taste in the mouth.The kind of rambutan most reputed nation-wide is grown in Binh Hoa Phuoc village in Long Ho district (Vinh Long province). During the rambutan season, one can notice the typical bright red colour of rambutan fruit stands located in the markets or along road intersections throughout the southern provinces#Squatting
chom chop`Xem chop
chom hom`On one's heels, squatting
chom no`o blossom; to bloom
chom sao`Constellation
chom xom`Hamlet and sub-hamlet
chon`Destination, place, area, home#To bury, to fix in the ground#To choose, to select, to pick out#Weasel#Numb with weariness, stiff#isheartened
chon cat`To inter
chon chan`To confine oneself, to keep oneself shut up#o pin down
chon hon`Squatting (sitting position)
chon loc`To pick and choose, to select
chon long`Disheartened
chon lua`Nhu lua chon
chon von`To swim about, to cruise#Very high and solitary
chong`Fast, rapid, quick#Husband#ile, heap#To pile, to heap, to overlap#Narrow bamboo bed#Spike#To keep (light, torch) burning on for a long time#o keep (eyes) open for a long time, to stare for a long time#To lie with an end up#To prop, to lean on as a prop#o punt#o oppose, to resist#To tease (noi ve tre em)
chong chanh`ranky; shaky
chong chat`To heap up
chong che`To try to justify oneself
chong chenh`Tottering#Xem trong trenh
chong cheo`To overlap (in an irregular way)
chong cho`Solitary and scattered
chong choc`Fixed
chong choi`To front, to confront, to stand up to#o resist; to strungle
chong chong`Pinwheel#ropeller#Xem chong
chong cu`To resist
chong do`To prop up#o resist
chong doi`To oppose, to be hostile to
chong gai`Spikes and thorns, difficulties, obstacles and dangers
chong gheo`To tease in a familiar way
chong gong`Lying with all fours in the air, lying by oneself#Xem chong gong
chong kenh`On one's back, on its back#Xem chong kenh
chong lon`Sharp-tongued, sour-tongued
chong mat`Dizzy
chong ngong`all
chong tra`To oppose
chong vanh`Prompt, expeditious
choong`Crow-bar
chop`Lightning#lash, flare#To flash, to flare up#o wink, to blink#To have a wink of sleep, to sleep a wink#To snatch, to grab, to nab#Top#ap#o suipe; to steal
chop bong`Nhu chieu bong
chop bu`Top-notch
chop chep`Smacking noise
chop chop`macking noise
chop mat`Nhu chop#to blick; to wink
chop nhoang`Like lightning, with lightning speed
chot`Extremity, end, last#Glaring, staring#One-eyed#ip, stunt#borted#Suddenly#nhu tot#olt, fastening pin cotter pin#rux (of a problem)#ommanding position#To bolt
chot da`Startled
chot mat`lind in one eye
chot nha`To be) half-serious and half-joking (in one's speech or behaviour)
chot nho`o remember suddenly
chot vot`Towering
chu`(Particle denoting plurality)#All right, satisfactory#Now#Owner, proprietor#aster#mployer, boss#Uncle (younger brother of one's father), uncle (affectionate form of address)#(Affectionate appellation and address used with little boys)#(Form of address and appellation used with young men)#(Ironical form of address and appellation used with personified animals)#(Affectionate, considerate or familiar form of address and appellation used with men regarded as equal to one's uncle, younger brother)#Writing, script#etter, type#yllable, foot#ord#tu noi#ertainly, would rather...than#(Particle used in question tags with emphatic affirmational implication)
chu bai`Trump card
chu bat`chan chu bat Bow-legged
chu bien`Chief author
chu but`Editor-in-chief
chu cai`Alphabet, letter of the alphabet
chu cap`To provide for
chu chi`Zigzag
chu chien`To be for war, to stand for war
chu chot`Most important
chu chuyen`To rotate
chu dan`Note and quotation
chu dao`Decisive#Thoughtful
chu de`Theme, leitmotiv, subject
chu dich`Main aim, main purpose
chu dien`mat chu dien A square face
chu dinh`Definite aim, clear intention
chu dong`o take the initiative, to have the sense of initiative
chu du`To be a globe-trotter, to do globe-trotting
chu giai`Nhu chu thich
chu han`hinese characters
chu hau`Vassal, vassal state, satellite state
chu ho`Head of a household
chu hoa`To be for peace, to stand for peace
chu hon`Person presiding over a wedding
chu khao`Chairman of a board of examiners, head examiner
chu ky`eriod; cycle#ignature; hand
chu lai`Nhu chu li
chu li`On the contrary, certainly
chu luc`Main force, driving force
chu may`(Familiar form of address used with one's younger brother or a young man about the same age)
chu minh`(Intimate form of address used with one's younger brother or a young man about the same age and position)
chu muc`To gaze at, to concentrate one's attention upon
chu muu`Instigator, principal#eliberate scheme, intentional plan#To contrive, to instigate master mind
chu nghia`Doctrine, -ism#-ist#Word and its meaning#nowledge, cultural level
chu ngu`Subject (of a sentence)#chan vat chu ngu crossed legs
chu nhan`Master, owner
chu nhan ong`Master, lord
chu nhat`Hinh chu nhat A rectangle#Sunday
chu nhiem`Chairman, director, head
chu nho`Han ideogram, Han script
chu no`Creditor#Slave-owner
chu nom`Demotic script (Ancient Vietnamese script)
chu quan`In charge, in control#Subjective feeling, subjective thinking, subjective point of view#Subjective, personal, own
chu quoc ngu`Vietnamese script, Vietnamese Roman alphabet
chu quyen`Sovereignty
chu so`Cipher, numeral, figure
chu su`Petty official (o cac bo thoi phong kien)
chu tam`Deliberate intention#To intend, to mean#To give one's whole mind to
chu tat`Full and careful#To see to (some business) with thoroughness and care#bbreviation
chu thau`Contractor
chu the`Main organ, essential part#ubject
chu thich`To provide with notes#Note#khau ngu)Thief
chu tich`Chairman, speaker#resident (of a country)
chu tich doan`Presidium
chu toa`To chair#Chairman
chu toan`Whole, fully discharged, fully seen to#To keep whole
chu tri`To be the main responsible person for, to sponsor
chu trinh`(Recurrent) cycle#irginity; conjugal fidelity
chu trong`To attach special importance to
chu truong`To lay down as a policy, to advocate, to decide#Guideline, policy
chu tuong`General commanding an army#ll the generals
chu vi`Circumference, perimeter#urrounding area, outskirts
chu viet`riting, script
chu xuong`nhu thu xuong
chu y`Main meaning, main purpose#To mean, to intend#To pay attention to#o be constantly concerned with
chu yeu`Essential
chua`Master#ord, suzerain#overnor#od, Creator#Pagoda#To be pregnant, to be with child, to be in the family way (nguoi); to be with young (thu')#Nhu chua#To contain, to hold, to be full of#To keep#To cure, to treat, to correct, to repair#o alter, to doctor#To leave#o leave alone, to spare#o give up#To make clear with a note#Sour, acid, vinegary#luminous#arsh, sharp#ough#Yet, not yet#Particle used in question tags, asking for affirmation)
chua bao gio`ever
chua binh`o cure; to treat a patient
chua cay`Bitter
chua chan`Suffuse, overflowing
chua chap`To receive (hang lau.), to shelter (illegally)
chua chat`Bitter#Charged with, fraught with
chua chay`Nhu chay chua
chua chien`Pagodas (noi khai quat)
chua chung`Perhaps, maybe
chua cong`Lord
chua dung`Filled with, pregnant with
chua he`Never
chua hoang`To be got into trouble (gai chua chong), to be made pregnant by a
chua ngoa`Sharp-tongued
chua ngot`Sweet and sour (dishes)
chua nhat`Nhu chu nhat
chua te`Supreme ruler
chua then`To mitigate one's shame
chua troi`God, Creator
chua xot`Heart-rending, painfully sad
chuan`Standard, criterion#Up-to-standard, up-to-the-mark standard
chuan bi`To prepare, to make ready
chuan chi`To authorize (some expenditure)
chuan dich`oal; norm
chuan hoa`Nhu chuan muc hoa
chuan muc`tandard
chuan muc hoa`To standardize
chuan tuong`Brigadier general
chuan uy`Commissioned warrant-officer
chuan xac`Fully accurate
chuan y`To approve, to grant
chuc`Office, rank, ship#To stand by#o be about to#To tilt#o wish#en
chuc danh`Office
chuc dich`Village officials (in former times)
chuc mung`To congratulate
chuc nang`Function
chuc nghiep`areer; profession
chuc phan`Function
chuc quyen`ompetence; right of one's office
chuc sac`Dignitary
chuc san`o be deay
chuc tho`To wish (an elderly person) longevity
chuc thu`Will, testament
chuc trach`Responsibility (inherent in each function, organ...)
chuc tu`Formal eulogy with wishes (at a ceremony, banquet...)
chuc tung`To express one's wishes and praises
chuc tuoc`Office and title
chuc vi`Social status
chuc vu`Function (of one's office)
chuech choac`Nhu chech choac
chui`To abuse, to call (someone) names#To bend one's head forward#o be completely engrossed in#To glide headlong, to creep#o sneak in#o cede (a card)#Contraband,of illicit still mua chui to buy contraband goods#To rub off, to scrape off#o wipe, to mop
chui boi`To call (someone) bad names
chui dau`nhu chui
chui luon`To cringe
chui mang`To abuse and scold
chui mui`nhu chui
chui rua`To curse at, to revile
chui ruc`To huddle (into a cramped place)
chui the`o swear at; to bounce out; to slip out
chum`Big jar#Cluster, bunch#encil#aceme#To huddle, to concentrate, to gather#o feed (firewood) to fire#To round (lips)#Top cut off an areca-nut
chum chim`To open slightly (one's lips)
chum choe`Cymbal
chum chum`xem chum
chum hoa`luster of flowers
chun`To contract, to shrink#To recoil, to shrink, to flinch from
chun chin`Plump, chubby
chun chut`Xem chut
chung`Common, public#eneral, basic, fundamental#ame#Masses#We, us, they, them, you#Nhu chun#Slack#aggy#Rough measure, rough extent, rough estimate#oughly estimated stage#ventuality, case, contingency#To show off, to sport#o distil#Nhu o, tai#To stop short#o totter#Dignified#To vaccinate, to inoculate#Xem bo chung
chung bay`Nhu trung bay
chung benh`Disease, trouble#ad habit#vidence, proof##Disease, illness
chung binh`isease; illness; sickness
chung cat`To distil
chung cha`To share everything in everyday life#o share bed and board
chung chac`Stately, dignified
chung chi`Chit, chitty#ertificate
chung chung`Very vague, unspecific
chung co`Evidence
chung cu`Xem chung co
chung cuc`nhu rut cuc
chung cuoc`inal; end
chung dan`To produce evidence (proof)
chung dau`o vaceinate
chung dien`Showing off, swanky (in one's way of dressing, or decoration)
chung duc`To crystallize
chung dung`To rub shoulders with
chung giam`To witness (noi ve luc luong linh thien)
chung hung`Nhu tung hung
chung ket`Final
chung khoan`Securities, bonds, stocks and share
chung kien`To witness
chung loai`Genera and species (sinh vat)#ort, kind
chung minh`To prove, to demonstrate#noi ve luc luong linh thieng) To take cognizance of and bear witness to#We, us, pals
chung minh thu`Identity card
chung muc`Measure, just measure, moderation
chung nao`When#ow much
chung nhan`To certify#itness
chung nhu`Supposedly
chung no`hey; them
chung quanh`Surrounding area, neighbourhood
chung quy`In the last analysis, on the whole
chung sinh`Living beings
chung ta`We, us (including person addressed)#Witness
chung tham`To exercise final jurisdiction
chung than`Life
chung thu`ertificate; diploma
chung thuc`To certify as true#o confirm as true, to substantiate
chung thuy`Loyal, faithful
chung tinh`To love only one person, to be steadfast in love
chung to`To prove, to denote
chung toc`Race
chung toi`We, us (not including person addressed)
chung tu`Voucher, receipt, document
chung vien`Seminary
chuoc`Dodge, trick, resort#To exempt, to dispense with, to excuse#To redeem, to ransom#To take pains to get, to go to any lengths to get#o look for, to ask for, to bring on one's head, to court#o pour out (wine) for guests
chuoc toi`o atone for one's sins
chuoi`Banana#Handle, hilt#Nhu chui#To glide#o drop (slip) quickly and neatly#To parboil#o bleach#o slip through one's fingers#hain; string; series
chuoi hoa`Canna
chuoi ngay`uccession of days
chuoi soi`Abaca
chuom`Puddle, pool (in fields)#ranch dipped in water (for fish to live in)#To apply compresses to
chuon`Nhu chuon chuon#To make oneself scarce, to hop it#o move stealthily
chuon chuon`Dragon-fly#con chuon chuon
chuong`Bell, buzzer#Chapter#Offending the sight, unaesthetic, unseemly, unsound, unpalatable.#Stable, sty, cage, coop#nclosure (in which is heaped something)#To value above other things, to attach importance to#to appear
chuong an`eeper of the seals
chuong ba`Village land registrar (thoi phong kien va thuoc Phap)
chuong cao pho`eath-bell;passing-bell
chuong khe`otary; public notary
chuong khi`Miasma
chuong ly`ttorney#eneral; public proscentor
chuong ngai`Obstacle, hurdle
chuong ngai vat`Barricade, barrier
chuong tai`Unpalatable, unacceptable
chuong tieu`Nhu chuong xi
chuong trai`Breeding facilities
chuong trinh`Programme, plan, syllabus
chuong xi`Latrine
chuop`Brined (salt-pickled) fish (from which fish sauce is made)
chuot`Rat, mouse#o be at the end of one's tether#em chay#em chinh#To polish
chuot bach`Albinic mouse
chuot chu`Shrew-mouse
chuot chui`Mole
chuot cong`Sewer-rat, brown rat
chuot dong`Field-mouse
chuot lang`Guinea-pig
chuot nhat`House-mouse
chuot rut`(y hoc) Cramp
chup`To cover, to put on#o snatch, to catch#o snap, to photograph#Nhu chup den
chup anh`To photograph, to take a photograph of, to have one's photo taken
chup den`Chimney (of lamps)
chup lay`o seize; to grab; to grasp
chup mu`To charge thoughtlessly (someone) with (some ideological mistake..)
chut`Great-great grandchild#Smacking noise
chut chit`Squeak (tieng chuot keu)#Dumpy (noi ve tre em)
chut dinh`A little bit
chut it`A little
chut xiu`A dash, a tiny bit
chuy`Club#hack, thwack, thump, heavy thrashing
chuyen`Talk, story#ob, work matter#uss, trouble#To decant (tea) (from a big cup into a smaller one)#o pass by hand#Having as the only or main occupation, occupying mainly oneself with#pecialized in, expert in, versed in#ssiduous, diligent#To move, to transfer, to shift, to switch over, to change#To pass, to carry#o move one's body from one place to another#Trip, flight#ime
chuyen banh`To start moving (xe..)
chuyen bay`he flight
chuyen bien`To arrange (a piece of music)#To change, to evolve
chuyen bung`Nhu chuyen da
chuyen can`Diligent, industrious, assiduous
chuyen che`To hold absolute authority, to rule as an autocrat
chuyen chinh`To exercise dictatorship#Dictatorship
chuyen cho`To transport
chuyen chu`Nhu chuyen tu#To address oneself to
chuyen da`To begin labour (noi ve phu nu co mang)
chuyen dat`To transmit, to communicate (higher level's ideas, orders)
chuyen de`Special subject
chuyen di`To move, to transfer
chuyen dich`To move#o transfer
chuyen dong`To move#o rock
chuyen dung`Specially made for (noi ve cong cu, may moc)
chuyen gia`Expert, specialist, authority
chuyen giao`To hand over, to make over
chuyen hoa`To specialize#To transform, to change
chuyen huong`To shift
chuyen khao`Monograph
chuyen khoa`Speciality
chuyen khoan`Transfer (of money)
chuyen mon`Professional knowledge, profession skill, speciality#Specialized in
chuyen mon hoa`To make specialized, to make into specialist
chuyen nganh`Limited speciality#To be demobilized and given a post as civil servant
chuyen nghiep`Profession, trade, vocation#Professional
chuyen ngu`Vehicular language, vehicle
chuyen nhuong`To transfer
chuyen phiem`dle talk
chuyen tam`To give one's whole mind to
chuyen tiep`Transition
chuyen tinh`ove story
chuyen trach`To specialize in and be responsible for
chuyen tro`Nhu tro chuyen
chuyen truoc`ast time
chuyen tu`To follow a crash course in#To transliterate
chuyen van`To chat one's time away#Vicissitude, whirligig
chuyen vi`To transpose
chuyen vien`Specialist, expert#iddle or high-ranking research worker (in an administrative office or a mass organization)
co`Aunt; auntie; Miss; young lady#To boil down#Fan-palm#To rub#o scrub, to scour#Flag, banner, standard#exillum (in a pea flower)#assel (male inflorescence of maize)#hess#Co nguoi thuong dien ra vao dip hoi thang ba. Nam nu thanh nien mac quan ao mang ten quan co. Nguoi dieu khien ngoi tren cao dieu khien quan co di. Co khi nhung nam nu ay con mang theo khi gioi va truoc khi an mot quan co, ho se mua mot the vo#Grass, weed#mall size#Great grandfather or mother#To mortage; to secure by mortgage#o try; to endeavour#Neck#old; ancient; antique#Set; suite; piece; park#feast; hanquet#Stork#noi ve dong ruong) Immense (over which a stork can take a long flight)#ostage stamp#To be#o have, to own#To contract, to shrink#o bend, to curl up#cause, reason; ground; pretext#heart#uscle#ccasion; possibility; opportunity#sire; stature#aliber; about
co an`Well-to-do, comfortably off
co bac`Gamble; gambling
co bac dau`White-headed grass
co ban`Base; foundation; fundamentals
co bop`To pulsate
co cay`Vegetation
co chan nhen`Finger grass
co chap`persistent; stubborn
co chong`arried
co chua`To be big with child (nguoi), to be with young (thu')
co co`Nhu lo co
co con`Petty
co cu`Nhu co gau#To wheeze
co cua`Lousy with money, wealthy#To perform badly on (a violin...)#o drag on
co cuc`Ravenous; poor and hard
co dau`Bride
co dien`classical; classic
co dieu`Only, only that
co dinh`Fixed
co do`Ancient; old capital
co don`Alone; solitary
co dong`To launch a propaganda
co ga`Bermuda grass
co gang`To try; to endeavour; to make every effort
co gau`Nut grass
co gian`Elastic
co gianh`Nhu co tranh
co giat`Convulsive
co gioi`Machine; mechanical implement
co hau`Having a happy ending#onstant (in one's relations with others)
co hieu`Dutiful (to one's parents)
co hoc`Archaeology#Educated, cultivated
co hoi`Opportunity; occasion; chance
co hon`forsanke spirits
co hu`Outdated; old-fashioned
co huong`Native land; native village
co huu`chronic, Always existing
co ich`Useful
co ke`To haggle#Xem bay co ke
co keo`To tug, to pull#o contrive with little
co khi`I'm afraid#ometimes
co kho`ay
co lao`Fragrant thoroughwort
co lap`Isolated
co le`Perhaps, maybe
co ly`ight; reasonable; sensible
co man trau`Goose grass
co mang`Nhu co thai
co mat`Honey grass#To be present at, to be attending
co mo`ntique tomb
co moi`Decoy, decoy-duck
co muu`Puse; stratagem
co nghia`Constant (in one's sentiment) (in relation to others)
co nghiep`Fortune; Assets
co nhan`Compassionate, humane#Old friend; old flame#men of old; The people of the very distant past
co nhi`Ophan
co phan`stock; share
co phieu`coupon; share certificate
co qua`Orphan and widow
co quan`Organ
co quan tai`Coffin;
co quanh`Solitary; secluded
co quap`Curled up
co quoc`Native country
co ra`Shabby, seedy
co ro`To huddle oneself up, to stoop#To walk with one's head sunk between one's shoulders
co rut`ontractive
co sat`To commit wilful homicide
co sau rom`Green bristle grass
co so`Installation; foundation; establishment
co thai`To be with child, to be in the family way, to be pregnant
co the`Can, may, to be possible, to be able to#robable, possible#Organism; Human body
co thon`Isolated hamlet
co tich`Historical vestiges
co tinh`Taking into consideration others' feelings, feeling
co tri`old acquaintance
co truong`(y hoc) Hydropsy
co truyen`Age-old
co tuoi`Advanced in years
co tuong`Chinese chess
co van`Adviser; counsellor
co ve`Corvee#To seem, to look
co vo`o excite; to exhort; to fire
co voi`Crest-fallen, with one's tail between one's legs#Elephant grass
co xat`To rub repeatedly#o come into contact with, to experience
coc`Stake, pale, picket#ile (of coins)#ecurity money#Stunted, dwarfed#Toad#Never, not at all#shirt; brief#to knekle#glass;tumbler#ormorant
coc cach`To clang#To clang#Unmatched (pair)#ranky
coc can`Rude; coarse; rough#ude; rough
coc cheo`Thole, tholepin
coc kho`Not at all
coc loc`Curt; brief; short
coc nhay`Skippingly
coc tia`Fire-bellied toad
coi`Black head#Country, region#orld#Hooter, whistle, siren#Stunted#Mortar#Root; origin#Root; origin#Stunted#Sedge#To see, to read#o do something (for oneself)#o seem, to look#to disengage; to untre; to unfasten#o take off; to set off#tray
coi bo`To seem, to look#Xem bo coi
coi chung`To mind, to pay attention to
coi coc`Stunted (noi khai quat)
coi cut`Orphamed
coi doi`he world
coi mo`Effusive; open-hearted
coi nhe`To make light of
coi re`To regard as of little value
coi soc`To mind, to look after
coi thuong`To think little of
coi tren`airyland
coi xay`Mill
coi xuong`Rickety
com`Flesh, pulp (of fruit)#Meal#Green rice flakes#Rice growing farmers are the only ones who truly understand when it is time to gather young grains to make Com. Then young rice grains are harvested, roasted and ground down to become Com. They are put into a large firing pan under small flames and stirred slowly for a specific period of time. They are then poured into a rice mortar and slightly pounded with a wooden pestle, rythmically and at quick intervals until the husk is removed. Following this, the young rice is removed from the mortar and winnowed before being poured again into the mortar and the process repeated. This is then repeated exactly seven times so that all the husk is removed from the young sticky grains. If the pounding is done irregularly and in haste, or it is not repeated for the prescribed seven times, the green colour of the grains will disappear and be replaced by an unexpected brown colour. Com is regarded as a purely pastoral gift. To enjoy Com, it is advisable to chew it slowly so that one can feel the stickiness of the young rice and at the same time enjoy its sweet, fragrant taste. Visitors to Vong village (about five km from Hanoi) during the Com making season will have a chance to listen to the special rythmic pounding of wooden pestles against mortars filled with young rice and see women shifting and winnowing the pounded young rice#Scrawny, thin and stunted#ent-backed#to bulge
com coi`Scrawny and stunted
com com`Bulging#Drudging
com den`(fig) Opium
com nhom`Thin and stunted
com nuoc`Food; meal
con`Alcohol#hillock; river islet#Child, offspring, young, son, daughter#apling, seedling con rau a vegetable seedling#Generic particle denoting a unit of animal or animal-like thing) A, an, the#Denoting derogatorily a person of some social category)#To continue (to live, to exist..)#o have...left, still have#Water-wheel#stick; cudgel
con bac`Gambler
con be`Miss, little girl
con benh`Patient
con binh`atim; sick person
con buon`Trafficker
con ca con ke`Xem ca ke
con cai`Children
con cat`and-bank
con chach`Bund
con chau`Posterity, offspring
con chien`Christian believer, member of the flock
con co`hess-man
con con`Nimble#Very minor, trifling, trivial#Xem con (lay)
con den`The rabble, member of the rabble
con diem`rostitute; whore
con do`Newly-born baby#elpless member of the people#gangster; ruffian; hooligan
con do dau`odson; god-child;god-daughter
con em`Juniors
con gai`Girl, daughter
con giai`Nhu con trai
con hoang`astard; illegitimate child
con lac`Pendulum
con lai`To remain, to be left
con ma`host
con me`Woman, hag
con mon`Small child (as a charge for its mother)
con mot`Only child
con mua`quall of rain
con nguoi`Man#Pupil
con nha`Child of good family
con nhu`As for, as to
con nit`Boy, child
con no`Debtor
con nua`ore
con nuoc`Tide
con o`aid; servant
con roi`Illegitimate child, child born out of wedlock, bastard child#Puppet
con so`Cipher, digit, numeral, figure#First-born child
con tao`The Creator, inexorable fate
con thu`nimal
con tin`Hostage
con tinh`Arithmetic operation#athematical problem
con trai`Son, boy#dolescent
con trinh`irgin; chaste; Sexually pure
con trung`Insect
con vu`izgig
con xoi`There will be a long time
cong`(Bot) petiole; stem#to add; to add up#Bent, curved#Blade#Tops#Drain; sewer ; culvert#to pay tribute#Gate; entrance#Barrier; level crossing#Gong#en years ago, the central highlands resounded with the echoes of an array of gongs. The Pleiku township in Gia Lai province was hosting the first "Cong Chieng" festival (Festival of gongs). Twelve Cong Chieng bands with 438 artists belonging to various ethnic minorities such as the E De, Gia Rai, Ba Na, Xo Dang presented a series of virtuoso performances. Seventy years separated the oldest and the youngest player Three years later, in 1988, participants numbered 1,000 from 14 ethnic groups from as many provinces. The deep sounds and melodies left an indelible impression on the large audience. The sounds of the Cong and the Chieng (Cong has a knob in the middle, Chieng has none -- Cong makes the deep bass sounds, melodies are coaxed out of the Chieng) are the very soul of the highlands. They are played to commemorate good harvests, at religious festivals and on many other occasions like child-birth, weddings, and funerals. Indeed, it is believed by the highlanders that a divine entity resides in each Cong and Chieng. In many communities, a Cong Chieng band consists of three Congs, nine Chiengs, a drum and cymbals played by about twenty artistes. The compositions played differ, of course, with each festival and occasion --, lively, melancholic or sombre. The Cong Chieng in Vietnam's central highlands is the subject of study for many anthropologists, musicians, and "orientalists". Figures of Cong Chieng teams can be found on bronze drums which date back to 3000 years ago. This suggests that these instruments made their appearance in the early days among ethnic tribes such as Thai, and Muong in northern Vietnam, and Koho, Kor, Ba Na, Stieng, Mnong, in the central highlands. With recent economic and cultural developments, many musical instruments have made their way to the central highlands, but the Cong Chieng will remain intricately woven into the fabric of a highlander's life for ever. -- ()#Numb with cold#To carry on the back; to carry pick-a-back#curved; bent#Kind of mall crab#rons; fetters; handcuff#peacock#con cong#work; labour#Public; common
cong an`Public security; police
cong bo`To publish; to proclaim
cong chinh`danh tu, public works; civil engineering
cong chua`princess
cong chung`The public
cong coc`Cormorant#Silent
cong con`Shrewish (dan ba)
cong dan`citizen; subjects
cong danh`position and fame
cong doan`Trade-union
cong duoi`Chay cong duoi To take to one's heels
cong giao`catholicism
cong ham`Diplomatic note
cong hien`to dedicate; to contribute
cong hoa`Republican
cong ich`public interest; public benefit
cong kenh`Bulky; unwidly
cong khai`Public; open
cong luan`Great merit; exploit#public opinion
cong luc`olice force
cong ly`ustice
cong nghe`Craft; industry
cong nghiep`Industry
cong nhan`Worker; employee; workman#to allow; to recognize; to consecrate
cong phap`public law
cong queo`Twisted, crooked, winding
cong qui`ublic funds
cong san`Communist
cong tac`Mission; business#to cooperate; to collaborate
cong thuc`Formula
cong thuong`Industry and trade
cong trai`State loan; government bond
cong ty`ompany; corporation
cong van`Official dispatch; official correspondence
cong xa`Commune
cong xuat`n mission
cong xuong`Shop; workshop
cop`Tiger#on cop#to copy; crib
cot`Bone#keleton#ssence#pillar; column, mast; pole column#to trifle; to tease
cot co`Flagpole; flagstaff; flag tower
cot ket`Creak#Grind
cot nhuc`Bone and flesh, (fig) blood relationship
cot tru`Main pilar, chief stay
cot truyen`ame work; plot
cot xe`orset; stays
cu`(Bot) Bulb; tuber#to croak; to pop off#Dove#penis; cock; prick#Great grandparent; parent#Old; ancient; second-hand#the owl#verse; line; sentence#blow; trick; xick#to abstain from#period; time#to continue; to keep on#to delegate; to depute; to raise; to begin#to dwell; to live#to scold; to oppose; to resist#to ticklel; to entice
cu dan`population; inhabitant
cu diem`entrenched fortification
cu hanh`to celebrate; to begin to do
cu lao`Island (fif) hard labour
cu li`(cu) coolie; cooly
cu nhan`Bachelor
cu phap`Syntax
cu soat`to check
cu the`concrete; material
cu tri`voter; elector
cu tuyet`to refuse; to decline
cu van`to question; to examine
cu vo`Barn-owl; hawk and undture
cu xu`to behave; to deal with
cua`Door; entrance, opening#To stir; to budge#spur (of cock)#crab#corner; turning#property; belongings; given kind of food#f; belong to; from#to cut with a blunt knife#to saw; to amputate
cua ai`Frontier passage
cua cai`riches; fortune; havings; wealth
cua hang`shop; store
cua hoi lo`ribe
cua la`Rarthing
cua minh`(Anat) vulva
cua so`window
cuc`(Bot) Chrysanthemum#Button#clod; clot; lump; piece#Office; ministry department#Rough; coarse#pole#ultra; extremely
cuc diem`ulmost; maximum; extreme
cuc dien`situation; complexion; conjuncture
cuc duc`to bring up; to feed
cuc hinh`Torture
cuc mich`himsy; lumpish
cuc tay`raser
cui`Kennel; cage#Topless cage#Wood; fire wood#fig) High prices#leprosy#pulp; blackhead#to bow; to stoop; to band#Roll of carded cotton
cui cho`Elbow
cum`(Med) Influenza#Fetters#chister; grove
cum num`imorous; scarful
cun`Blunt; blunt pointed#orn-out#tubbled;Rusty
cun cut`Quail
cung`Hard; tough; rigid#also; as; too#ven; very#ame; either#end; limit; extremity#to the extremity#hole; all over#ame#nd; together with#palace; temple#ow; arc potch; mode#tem; chapter#vidence; depositon; testimony#tage; adminis trative divison of a road#To supply#to clout on the forehead#to pamper#to worship, to donate; to throw away
cung cau`Supply and demand
cung co`to consolidate; to reinforce
cung coi`Firm
cung khai`To depose; to confens
cung kho`poor and miserable
cung nu`Imperial maid
cung phi`Imperial concubine
cung tan`at lost; in the end
cuoc`Foot#Transportation charges#Suamp hen#to hoe#party; bont; match; game#to bed; to lay
cuoc doi`life; existence
cuoc phi`postage; carriage
cuoi`Suamp hen#to hoe#butt; stump; stub#pebble#Nonsense; humbug#to laugh; to smile; to sneer#to wed; to marry
cuoi che`to make fun of
cuoi cung`last; final, at last; ultimate
cuoi guong`to force a smile
cuoi ngao`rating laugh
cuoi tinh`smile amorously
cuom`to steal; to rob; to make of with#wrist; ankle#Glass-bead; courbary bead
cuon`Bale; roll; reel#to coil; to whirl#to roll; to roll up; to sweep; to coil; to wrap#copy; volume
cuon cuon`to curl
cuon goi`(fig) to park up and leave
cuong`(Bot) stem; stalk#coupon#Rein; bridge#to impaovise#Turgid#mad; crazy#strong; vigorous#to force; to compel
cuong buc`to force; to compel
cuong cuong`to lose one's head
cuong dam`to rape; to violate (a girl or woman)
cuong dao`Bandit
cuong do`Intensity
cuong doat`to extort; to carry off by force
cuong linh`Fudamental
cuong nhiet`Madly violent; excessive
cuong quoc`power; great nation
cuong quyet`Determined decided; firm
cuong tin`Fanatic
cuong trang`vigorous; forceful
cuong truc`upright
cuop`to rob; to pillage; to plunder; to despoil
cuop bien`prirate; sea-robber
cup`To close; to hang loose; to lower#cup#to stop; to cut
cut`cut off; lopped; blind#shit; Exerement; dung#to clear out; to beat it#vial; phial
cut dai`xcrete; durty thing
cut hung`to lack inspiration
cut ray`Ear-wax
cut xu`ew-born's faeces
cuu`Sheep#ine#old; former; ancient#to help; to aid#to save; to rescue; to relieve
cuu canh`object, finality; end
cuu chien binh`veteran,
cuu chuong`Multiplication table
cuu dich`Enemy; hostile; adversary
cuu han`Enemy
cuu khang chien`ormer resistance member,
cuu mang`to bear; to be pregnant
cuu thoi`ld time; former time
cuu tinh`Salvation; salviour
cuu trao`previous dynasty
cuu tro`to relieve; to help
cuu truyen`to stick to
cuu tuyen`(fig) Hell; hades
cuu xet`to consider
da`(Bot) banyan-tree skin; derm#ide; leather; pelt#already#s; since#banyan-tree much,many#beam; girder#impetus#omentum#rock; stone#to kick#to hit; to strike; to slate#tu cam#es ; please#felt#eart; mind#wild; savage. rustic#to neutralize the effect of (aleohol...)
da am`olysyllabic; polyphonic
da am tiet`Polysyllabic
da bang`Slate
da bao`pluricellular
da boc qui dau`anat) Foreskin
da boi`(sinh vat) Pplypoid
da bong`o play football
da bot`Pumice stone
da cam`orange skin#sentimental; sensitive; emotional#wild birds
da canh`(nong) Polyculture
da che mat ngua`linder
da chien`field combat
da cuc`(ly, sinh) Multipolar
da cuoi`Coobble, pebble
da da`cung noi ga go Francolin
da dam`oversexed; lewd; lascivious#xem da giam
da dan`Dawdle, diily-dally
da dang`Multiform, diversified
da danh`of course; assuming that
da dao`to demolish; to down with
da day`stomach
da de`skin; complexion
da dien`polyhedron
da diet`grawing; tormenting
da dieu`ostrich
da dinh`Having many sons
da dit`(thong tuc) Kick out
da doan`Complicate, tangled
da doi`To [the point of] satiety
da dong`Touch upon
da dot`Clip one's words, mispronounce, lisp
da dua`Pay lip servive
da duc`enmal
da duoi`ired; worn out
da ga`Poke one's nose in very briefly; add an uninvited comment on a mater not concerning one
da giac`polygon,#polygonal
da giam`Macadam
da gian`Vent one's anger, until one's anger is vented
da hinh`(sinh, hoa, ddi.a) Polymorphic, polymorphous
da hoa`marble
da hoa cuong`granite
da hoc`Stone just quarried
da hoi`evening party
da hon`olygamous
da huyet`Sanguine
da khat`Quench one's thirst, slake quenched
da khoa`(y hoc) General practice
da kich`to criticize; to attack
da la`(dung voi thi) As
da lang`patent; enamelled
da lat`Paving stone
da lau`ong ago; a long time ago
da lien`(y hoc) Polyvalent (of a vaccine)
da lieu`skin and venereal diseases
da lua`flint; silex
da mai`grind stone; whashstone
da man`savage; barbarous
da mang`to take on many jobs at the same time, to set one's mind on
da mau`Soft stone (de mai dao)
da moi`wrinkled skin
da muu`wily; cunning
da nam cham`Magnetite, loadstone; magnet
da ngam`Oust (by underhand tricks), supplant
da nghi`suspicious; distrustfull
da nghia`Polysemantic
da nguoi`uman skin
da nguyen`polygenetic
da nham`nhu da bot#dia phuong) nhu da rap
da nhan`ustic; gorilla
da ong`Laterite
da pha`Fight for the abolition of
da phan`(it dung)#ost#ostly, for the most part#Chalk
da phien`Schist
da phu`Polyandrous, polygamous
da phuong`Multilateral
da quang`fire-fly; glow-worm
da quoc gia`Multinational
da roi`Done and not reversible, accompli (in " fait accompli")
da sau`melancholy
da sinh to`Polyvitamin
da so`majority; generality
da su`Meddlesome, behaving like a busybody
da ta`Show deep gratitude, express heartfelt thanks, be very graceful
da tai`Of versatile talent
da tai meo`Rugger rock
da tam`wicked intention; bad ambition
da than giao`polytheism
da the`nhu da_vay#polygamoug, polygynous
da them`Satiate one's yearning (for drinks...)
da thit`skin and flesh
da tho`Live long
da thong`Talk over, talk round
da thu`wild beast
da thu vang`Touchstone
da thuc`polynomical
da thuoc`leather ; prepared hide
da thuong`to wound
da tiet`nhu da am tiet
da tinh`sentimental, amorous
da trang`sandcrab
da tri`(ngon ngu, y hoc) Polyvalent
da tuc`(dong vat) Myriapod
da vang`indefectible; unshakeable
da vay`All the same, nevertheless#n that case
da voi`limestone
da vu`octurnal rain
da yen`night feast
dac`solid#hick; stiff#ondensed#special#to measure
dac an`Special favour, special privilege
dac biet`unusual; special
dac cach`Exceptionally, especially
dac chi`pleased; satisfied
dac cong`(quan ddo^.i) Commando
dac cu`Be returned, be elected
dac dac`(cu, it dung) nhu dang dac
dac dao`(cu) Teach the peak of the Way
dac dia`Be on a breeding ground
dac diem`Particular trait, characteristic
dac dien`to measure
dac dung`Get a deserving job (suitable to one's talents..)
dac hieu`(y hoc) Specific
dac huu`(sinh hoc) Endemic
dac khu`Special zone
dac kit`Compact, close, dense
dac loi`(cu) Obtain profit, obtain advantage#Special advantage,privilege
dac luc`Efficient, capable
dac nhan tam`(cu) Heart-winning
dac phai vien`special envoy ; special correspondent
dac phi`Special fees, special expenditure
dac quyen`Prerogative, privilege
dac sac`Special, of unusual excellence
dac sach`Come off, come to fruition
dac san`Special issue (of a paper)#Speciality
dac set`Very thick, dense#horoughly, genuinely
dac su`Special envoy, ambasador extraordinary
dac thang`to be victorious
dac the`Take advantage of one's favourable position
dac thu`Particular, specific
dac thu hoa`Particularize
dac tinh`particularilty; characteristics
dac toi`to be guilty
dac vu`Intelligence service, secret service (of a reactionary organization set up for subversive purpose)#ecret agent
dac xa`Grant (someone) a special reprieve (of a special occasion)
dac y`Have one's wish fulfilled, be fully satisfied
dach`(tuc)#unt#ot a bloody damn
dai`band; range#big; great; very, much#estrade; stage tower#long#penis#saliva#stupid; gatuous, wild, feral#to bear; to embroider#belt#and; hoop#to urinate; to have a pee; to make water#to wash; to treat#tough; leathery#ersistent; tenacious
dai bac`Cannon, gun
dai bai`Suffer a bitter defeat
dai ban doanh`general Headquarters
dai bang`Eagle
dai bien`(it dung) Great change#Charge d'affaires
dai bieu`Representative, delegate
dai binh`Great army
dai ca sa`Verbose, diffuse
dai cac`Snobbish, affected
dai chau`Continent
dai chien`world war; great war
dai chien cong`Great feat of arms
dai chung`the people; the masses
dai chung hoa`Popularize
dai cong nghiep`Large-scale industry
dai cong phu`Very elaborate
dai cuc`cung noi dai cuoc
dai cuong`general idea
dai dam`(cu) Great cougare, audacity#o wet the bed
dai dang`prawn-out; long lasting#treat, entertain
dai dang khoa`(cu) Graduate (from a competition-examination)
dai danh`Great fame, great renown
dai dat`elt of land
dai diem`Luxurious and indecent
dai dien`royal court-room
dai doanh`nhu dai ban doanh
dai dong`prolix; diffuse; lengthy
dai dot`foolish; stupid
dai duong`Be affected by diabetes mellitus#Ocean
dai gia`Great aristocratic family
dai gia dinh`Great family (including grandparents)#reat community
dai gia suc`Cattle
dai gian ac`nhu dai gian
dai gian hung`Arch knave
dai guong`Mirror's support#van chuong) High born woman, lady
dai han`cold spell (occurring on jan, 20-21)#drought
dai hinh`(cu) High sriminal court
dai hoc`higher education
dai hoi`General assembly, congress#estival
dai hoi dong`General assembly
dai hong phuc`Great blessing
dai hong thuy`Deluge
dai hung tinh`(thien van) The Great Bear
dai ky niem`emorial momment
dai luc`continent; mainland
dai mach`Barley
dai nao`Brain#Raise an uproar
dai ngan`High mountain and thick forest; jungle
dai nghi`Parliamentary
dai nghia`Great duty (toward the nation,society..); great cause
dai nghich`(cu)High treason
dai ngo`to behave; to treat
dai ngon`Bombastic, talking big
dai nguyen soai`Grand marsal
dai nhan`(cu) you [venerable sage]. your excellency
dai nhat`cung viet dai rat Be affected by micturition
dai nho`Great scholar
dai oc`Screw nut
dai so`nhu dai so hoc Algebraic 
dai so hoc`Algebraic
dai su`Ambassador#Great work, important business
dai su quan`Embassy
dai tat`Be ailing because of age
dai thao`Be affected by diabetes
dai tho`o bear
dai toi`(it dung) Redeem onefaults
dai truyen`Driving belt
dai tu`Big character, big calligraphic sing#Overhaul#Pronoun
dai y`gist; general idea
dam`(cu) Right#(cu, i dung) Indulge in#(dia phuong) nhu dom#Sedate, equable#To stab, to thrust#o put forth (buds)#o shoot, to dart#o pound#o turn, to become, to grow, to go#capable#to bear#dark; deep (colour) strong (tea, coffee) heavy, fat#lend; lustful#mass, patch#mile; road#to paint in water colours#protein#splinter#the pond rammer#to dare; to be bold erought to#to offer ; to propose#to punch; to stricke hard with the fist#to sink; to suffer shipwreck#to soak; to pickle; to steep#wet#xem giam
dam am`happy; sweet
dam bac`Group of gamblers, table of gamblers#insipid; simple; frugal
dam ban`o offer for sale
dam bao`to guarantee
dam bo`Make a high dive, nosedive#ush out
dam bon`(cu) Adulterous
dam bong`(thuc vat) Flower, bloom
dam bop`to massage
dam but`(bot) Hibiscus
dam chay`fire
dam chieu`Looking worried, anxious
dam choi`(thuc vat) Bud
dam cuoi`wedding ; marriage ceremony
dam da`Come to blows#warm; charming
dam dac`Concentrated, strong(of a solution...)
dam dam`Waiting intently for (someone, something)#ixedly
dam dang`debauched; lustful; lend#nhu dam
dam dao`to converse; to talk
dam dap`Moist, damp (usually with sweat)
dam dat`lascivious; lustful;#xem giam giat
dam dau`Rush headlong#ove heaven and earth and do something one cannot held#ave to take the road
dam de`soaked; oozingly wet
dam dia`Soaked through. Dripping wet
dam dong`Crowd; mod
dam duc`Lust, lewdness, sexual indulgence, concupiscence#ustful, concupiscent
dam duoi`passionately; distractedly
dam duong`to take on; to undertake
dam hoa`Pornograpic painting
dam hong`(van chuong, cu) Rosy road (full of dirt)#Pinprick, nettle#cung noi dam mom Give a sop to (somebody)
dam khoi`(van chuong, cu) Long sea voyage
dam lay`marssh; bog
dam lieu`(van chuong, cu) Long way#to become bold
dam loan`incestuous
dam luan`to discuss, to debate
dam ma`funeral; funeral procession
dam mau`Blood-stained#loody, saguinary
dam me`to indulge
dam minh`Wallow in
dam mom`(thong tuc) nhu dam hong
dam net`Bold
dam nghin`nhu dam ngan
dam ngon`Obscence language
dam nhan`assume; to take on
dam nhiem`Undertake
dam o`obscence; lend
dam phan`(van chuong, cu) The road back home#to negotiate, to hold diplomatic talks
dam phu`Contribution#adulteress
dam ra`Turn (bad...)
dam ruoc`Procession
dam sam`Crash against
dam say`Devote oneself to
dam suyen`(cu) Asthama
dam ta`(cu,it dung) nhu ta dam
dam tang`nhu dam ma
dam tham`Fervid, ardent, very fond
dam thoai`to converse, ta talk
dam thu`sexy book ; pornographic book
dam truong`long way; longjourney
dam vo`o offer marriage,dan to extend
dan`(dia phuong) xem nhan#Anticipate (someone's thoughts...), take the wind out of (someone's) sails#Press down, weigh down#Step one#dia phuong) nhu nhan#ball; cartridge; marble#birthday#daring; bold; inured to#flock; herd; drove musical intrument acoustic#to play music#people; citizen#silly; stupid#to advise; to recommend#to beat#to conduct; to guide; to escort to lead#to cut down; to chop down#to display; to arrange#to embart; to throw oneself; to plunge headlong#to knit; to weavear#to paste; to stick; to glue#to slap down; to lay down
dan anh`One's seniors' rank
dan ap`to repress; to suppress
dan ba`woman
dan bach`(cu) Albumin
dan bao`to advise; to counsel; to give recommendations
dan bau`Monochord#dan bau (monochord):  Dan bau consists of a long piece of wood, on which is stretched a silk or brass string, which is fastened at one end to a peg and at the other to a flexible bamboo plate. The string is passed repeatedly through an open dried gourd as sound box. Although having only one string, it can emit all the sounds in the pentatonic scale. The eight notes of Vietnamese music give modulations of greater amplitudes than those obtained by any other single-stringed instrument in the world. Today, Dan bau is made very carefully to ensure aesthetic and sound quality. When played in public, it is often used with an electronic amplifier
dan bep`Opium adict
dan bieu`people's representative
dan binh`(cu) Militia
dan buoc`Strive to work quicker
dan ca`Folk-song#olk-songs can be sung at home, at communal house or on hill..., depending on solo performance, repartee... They are transmitted from generation to generation, loved and preserved by the people. Folk-songs can belong to the localities or the ethnic minorities... Dan ca Quan Ho (Quan Ho folk-songs) originated in Ha Bac province. During village festivals which are held every year, particularly in spring, young, men and women gather in the yard of a communal house or pagoda, on a hill or in a rowing boat and sing Quan Ho This is a style of singing where songs alternate from group to group, going back and forth from one to the other. Quan Ho singing is a folk art of highly collective nature. Those who sing are not entertainers, but all are part of the performance, and everyone is welcome to join
dan canh`to stage
dan cay`(cu) Tiller
dan chai`Fisherman
dan chinh`Civil administration
dan chu`democratic
dan chu hoa`Democratize
dan chung`people; country#to cite; to adduce; to quete
dan co`(dia phuong) nhu dan nhi
dan cong`Conscripted labourer
dan cu`People-elected, elective#population; inhabitants
dan cuoi`Bring wedding offerings (according to traditional rituals) to the brides
dan da`(it dung) Rural people#Step by step, gradually
dan dan`Moisten the eyes#gradually; little by little
dan dao`trajectory
dan dau`March in the van, take the lead, lead#o lead; to come foremost
dan den`(cu) Mob, rabbel, common run of the people
dan deo`(dia phuong) xem nhan nheo
dan dich`Play music (noi khai quat)
dan dien`to conduct electricity
dan diu`to have an affair with; to be inlove with someone
dan do`(ngoai giao) Extradict#Make careful recommendations to#to extradite#to ponder ; to weigh
dan doanh`(it dung) nhu tu doanh
dan doi`Sulk, be sulky
dan don`dull,unintellegent
dan du`(cu; it dung) Induce (someone) to take one's advice
dan dum`(dia phuong) xem nhan nhum#Gang up (for gambling, dringking...)
dan dung`civil
dan duoc`ammunition
dan duong`Show (direct) the way
dan em`One's juniors' rank
dan ghem`Dust shot
dan giai`Gloss, insert glosses in
dan gian`Broad masses (of the people)#opular, folk
dan hoa`Inflammable [and fine-kindling]#to couciliate; to mediate
dan hoi`elastic, resilient
dan huong`Santal wood
dan lang`Villager
dan lap`People founded
dan lat`Knit
dan long`to hold oneself in
dan luat`civil law
dan mat`Forewarn (against opposition or resistanse)#brazen; shameless
dan ngheo`the poor. Dan ngheo thanh thi The poor of a city
dan nguyen`(cu) People's aspirations
dan nguyet`Vitenamese two chord guitar
dan nhi`Vietnamese two-chord fiddle#hi (or Co) is a sort of vertical violin with two strings of braided silk, a long handle and a sound box covered by a membrane of snake skin. With its melodious sounds, Nhi can express the subtle mood of man's soul. Due to its diversified use, Nhi is indispensable in a traditional musical orchestra
dan nhiet`to conduct heat
dan ong`Organ#man
dan phong`Civil defence#Popular customs
dan quan`militiaman
dan que`(van chuong) Red cinnamon; the moon#country-folk; peasant
dan quoc`(cu, it dung) Democracy (bourgeois)
dan quyen`civic rights
dan sinh`livelihood of the people
dan so`Population
dan su`civilian
dan tam`(van chuong) Loyalty, constancy#People's will ; people's hearts
dan tam thap luc`Vietnamese 36 chord zither
dan than`xem dan nghia 2
dan thap luc`Vietnamese 16 chord zither
dan thay`(cu) White collar workers
dan tho`(cu) Workman
dan thuong`the rand and file, the man in the street#ivilian (as opposite to soldiers)
dan thuy nhap dien`to irrigate
dan ti nan`efugee
dan tinh`(cu; it dung) People's lot, popular feeling
dan toc`Nation, race#ationality, ethnic group
dan toc chu nghia`Nationalist, nationalistic
dan toc hoa`Nationalize
dan toc hoc`ethnography; ethnology
dan toc tinh`National character
dan trang`(cu) Makeshift platfrom (for worsshipping budha)
dan tranh`dan tranh#Dan tranh is also called Dan thap luc (16-chord zither). The holed bottom of its box makes echo There are different musical skills, such as vibrating, clapping, pressing, stroking....Women use it when making solo performances, playing in an orchestra, accompanying a singer, declaiming poems..
dan tri`(cu) Canopied dais; the throne#(cu) People's cultural standard
dan tuy`Populist
dan van`propaganda with the population
dan ve`(cu) The people's self-defence corps (cua chinh quyen Mien Nam
dan von`(khau ngu) Capital, funds
dan xac`(thong tuc) (cung noi dan than xac) Show up, show one's face
dan xep`to settle; to arrange
dan xuat`(hoa hoc) Derivative
dan y`Civil medical service (as opposiste to army medical service)#People's will
dang`Able possible#n order to, in order that, for..to#bitter#direction#form; shape#gait; air ; shape#nhu duong#party; gang; band#rank; grade; class#to be the process of#to take on the responsibility of#to deserve; to merit#worthy;worth#to extend; to open wide ; to spread out#to insert; to put#to offer ; to present#o rise; to run high#to pull; to drag out#used to in front of names denoting talented or famous people)#xem giang
dang ap`isobaric
dang ay`(than) You
dang ba`(cu) cung noi dang bo Register
dang bo`commitee of a party
dang cai`to host#xem dang cai
dang cap`etate; rank; level
dang cau`(toan hoc) Isomorphous
dang cay`nhu cay dang
dang co`o pull about
dang cuong`Party political program
dang dac`ndless; interminable
dang dai`Appear on the stage, appear on the prize-rring#Dragging on
dang dan`Mount the rostrum, take the floor#limb on a devotional platform
dang dang`(y hoc) Acute otitis#nflamed with (anger...)#Interminable#n iinterminable day length of three autumns#xem dang
dang diem`Of easy virtue, light, wanton
dang dieu`air; appearance; manner
dang do`(cu) Depart, set off, take the road#unfinished; uncompleted
dang doi`Serving ne right, welldeserved#orthy, honourable#Well-matched, well- proportioned#cu)Take one's seat at one's office desk (noi ve quan lai)
dang gia`Giving good value for one's money, worth the money paid for
dang hang`cung noi dang hang Clear the throat, hawk#nhu dang hang
dang hoang`Comfortabily off#penly
dang huong`(vat ly) Isotropic
dang ke`noticeable, remarkable, considerable
dang khi`While
dang khoa`(cu) Graduate
dang kiep`nhu dang doi nghia 1
dang ky`o register
dang la`(cu) Climbing plant; concubine
dang lap`(ngon ngu) Coordinated
dang le`Ought to, normally
dang nay`(than)I, me
dang nghet`Very bitter
dang phai`Parties (noi khai quat)
dang phi`Party dues
dang quang`coronation; enthronement
dang so`Deserve one's fate#awesome
dang su`Party history
dang tai`(cu) nhu dang
dang tam`Be callous enough to
dang tay`Be ruthless enough to
dang ten`ace
dang thang`Normally, under normal circumstances#n a dignified way, in a stately way
dang thi`Be in the flush of youth
dang thuc`equation
dang tich`Party membership
dang tien`Worth its money value, worth the money paid for it
dang tinh`Party character, party spirit#Unconcerned, indifferent to what going on about one
dang toi`Proportional to one's offence
dang tri`Absent-minded#One party rule
dang trinh`(cu) Set off (on a journey), leave, take the road
dang truong`(cu) Party leader#(tinh tu+)(ly') Isotonic#isotonic
dang van`Fly, travel on a cloud (of supernatural beings)
dang xa`xem danh dang xa
danh`(dia phuong) nhu dinh#ard, hard and dry#harp (of sounds)#ardened, impessive (of expression)#Make up one's mind t, reconcile oneself to, resign oneself to#Unit of rice seedling (about to be transplanted)#name; fame; reputation#to beat; to strike; to fight; to combat#o play (one's card)#to save; to reserve; to engage
danh ba`Poison (pests...)
danh bac`Gamble
danh bai`Play cards#to defeat
danh ban`to make friend
danh bao`make so bold as to
danh bat`Catch (fish...)#Dislodge#Overpower
danh bay`Lay a trap to catch, set a snare to catch
danh bo cap`(dia phuong) Shiver from cold with teeth clattering
danh bong`to polish ; to shade (a drawing)
danh ca`Catch fish with a net, fish#et
danh cap`Filch, steal
danh chac`Gamble., Fight
danh chen`(thong tuc) Have a booze, goonthe booze
danh cuoc`nhu danh ca
danh da`Feel easy
danh dach`Convulsively
danh dai`Hoop, bind with hoops
danh dam`Sink (a ship)
danh dang xa`Swing one's arms (while walking)
danh danh`(bot) gardenia
danh dap`Beat, hit
danh day thep`(cu) nhu danh dien
danh dien`Send a cable, send a telegrame, cable
danh do`Bet#Overturn, upse#verthrow, topple
danh doi`(the thao) Play a double (at tennis...)#to exchange; to barter; to swap
danh don`Cane, whip#Play a single (at tennis)
danh dong`Alert, warn#Gather in a neat heap#Put on the same par (in the same basket, on the same footing)
danh du`To swing#Danh du dien ra trong cac hoi xuan hoac hoi thu o cac lang thuoc Ha Bac, Vinh Phu. Cay du lam bang tre, thuong trong gan noi dinh lang de trai gai toi vui choi. Day la dip giup cho trai gai duoc gan gui nhau va boc lo tinh yeu+Danh du (swinging) is a popular game in spring or autumn festivals in Ha Bac or Vinh Phu provinces. A swing pillar made of bamboo is planted near to the village communal house where boys and girls gather for entertainments. It is on this occasion that they get closer to one another and confide to one another more easily#honnour
danh dum`Save every bit of (money)
danh dung`All of a sudden#Slaughter and share#xem dung)
danh duoi`o drive off (away) ; to exped
danh gia`to estimate; to value; to asses
danh giac`Fight the aggressors
danh giam`Fish with a bamboo pot
danh giat`o cramble for
danh gio`Estimate the oppotuneness of the hour (of some action)#Rub out a cold
danh guc`Crush
danh hanh`Behave perversely, behave waywardly (thuog noi ve tre em)
danh hieu`honourable name; signification
danh hoi`Scent#x hoi nghia 3
danh hong`Plough, pluck, fail
danh kem`Apply face-cream (on one's face)#ream
danh lam`famous pagoda
danh loi`fame and wealth
danh long`Engage in off-shore fishing#satisfied; contented
danh lua`to deceive;to cheat
danh may`Type (on a typewriter)
danh moi`Colour one's lips (with lipstick)
danh muc`list; nomenclature
danh nga`Knock (somebody) down
danh nghia`name; title
danh ngon`famous saying; apophthgan
danh nhau`Fight#e at war with one another
danh nhip`Beat time
danh pham`amous literaty work
danh phan`Honour and position; attribution#Powder (one's face)#Resign oneself to one's fate; be content with one's lot
danh rang`Despite the fact that
danh rieng`eserved
danh sach`roll; roster; namlist
danh thang`Defeat,trounce, worst
danh thao`Rescue (from a siege, danger, difficulty.)#enege on the sale of something (because its price has risen on the market)
danh thep`Incisive, trenchant
danh thiep`visiting-card
danh thoc`Storm
danh thong`nhu da thong 
danh thuc`to awake; to wake up
danh thue`to tax; to impose
danh thuoc doc`Poison
danh thuoc me`Anaesthetize
danh tieng`Send word (to somebody indirectly)
danh trao`Exchange fraudulently (a bad thing for a good one.)
danh trong`Spool
danh trong lang`Evade answering an embarrassing question by changing topics
danh trong lap`Drown (a talk... not to one's liking) by speaking louder
danh trong nguc`Have one's heard throbbing
danh truot`nhu danh hong
danh tu`noun;
danh up`Spring a surprise attack
danh van`to spell
danh vat`To wrestle#o struggle against (with)#Danh vat dien ra trong cac hoi xuan cua hau het cac tinh phia Bac. Do vat chi dong kho. Trong luc cac dau thu vat nhau, co nguoi cam trong de thuc giuc va khuyen khich. Le vat, muon thang doi phuong, thi phai vat cho doi phuong nga ngua hoac doi bong doi phuong len#Danh vat (Wrestling) is a popular game in spring festivals in most of Southern localities. During the fight, wrestlers wear nothing other than their loin-cloths. At that time, one person is in charge of beating the drum to urge and stimulate them. To be considered as a winner, any wrestler must lift his opponent over his head or make the latter fall on his own back
danh vay`Can't be helped#Scale (a fish)
danh vo`Break by lack of attention#Give a boxing demonstration#ox, fight a boxing-match
danh vong`Swing a hammock#glory; celebrity; reputation
danh xe`Drive a vehicle
dao`Overflow, overbrim, boil over#khau ngu) nhu da#isle; island#to pray; to bag#knife#knife. bowie knife#road; way#time; period#to stroll; to take a walk#to attain; to reach#to dig up, to unearth#o escape#peach
dao an`Table-knife
dao ay`t that period; at that time
dao bai`Card-shaped knife
dao bao`Safety razor
dao bau`Chopper, sticker, sticking knife
dao binh`deserter#nhu binh dao
dao boi`Dig, excavate#all somebody names, curse and swear
dao buoc`Have (go for) a stroll
dao cao`razor
dao cau`Little card-shaped knife [for cutting areca-nuts]#Medicinal root slicer, apothercary's chopper
dao cay`Coulter
dao chanh`o overthrow a state
dao chich`(cu) Thief
dao chinh`Stage a coup d'etat
dao co`(san khau) Properties
dao dat`xem dat dao
dao dau`(it dung) Draw to a close, near its end
dao dien`Stage (a play) direct (a flim)#shifty
dao dong`to oscillate; to agitate; to swing
dao duc`morals, morality
dao duc hoc`Ethics
dao gam`dagger; poniard;
dao giao`Taoism
dao got`(van chuong) Bend one's step towards.dao mat#ake a stroll for fresh air ; take the air
dao ham`(toan) Derivative
dao hoa`(hinh anh) to be lucky in love
dao huu`Co-religionist
dao kep`(cu)Actresses and actors
dao kiem`(cu)Rosy cheeks; peach of a girl#Knife-shaped lance and sword; weapons
dao lon`Upset
dao lon hot`Cashew
dao luat`law
dao luyen`Train, coach
dao ly`easonable; logical
dao mao`Imposing, stately (noi ve nguoi)
dao mo`Mine, exploit#cu) Be a fortune-hunter, be a gold- digger#ancet; bistoury
dao nghia`moral principl
dao ngoi`Re-adjust (re-arrange) the tiles (of a roof)
dao ngon`Rumour
dao ngu`to desert
dao nguoc`to reverse, to upset
dao nguyen`(van chuong) Fairies' home, Elysium
dao nhiem`Come and take up one's duty, come and assume one's responsibility
dao nhip`Penknife, pocket-knife
dao nuong`(cu) Singsong girl, geisha
dao on`(nong nghiep) piriculariose
dao pha`All-purpose knife
dao phay`Chopping-knife
dao phu`Excutioner, headsman, hangman
dao quam`Bush-whacker
dao rua`Cleaver, jungle-knife
dao sau`(nghia bong) Examine thoroughly (a question)
dao si`Taoist hermit
dao tac`(cu) Robbers and thieves
dao tao`to form; to create
dao tau`(cu) Run away, take to flight, flee
dao thai`Eliminate
dao thuong`(van chuong) nhu binh dao
dao vu`(cu) Hold a prayer for rain
dao xep`claop-knife; jack-knife
dap`dam; barrage#to beat; to threash; to smash#to answer ; to reply#to take (train, plane) to land; to come to ground#to bury; to stam out; to bang; to batter#to emtank; to bank; to cover with#to stamp; to trample#to wet
dap an`Detailed schemed solution (answer), model solution, key (to exercises, problems..)
dap bang`Level flat (all obstacles)
dap da dap dinh`xem dap dinh (lay)
dap dap`o dam up
dap denh`ob
dap diem`Protect and help
dap dinh`(it dung)#limily wet.#noi ve mat) Half-closed (as if the upper and lower eyelids nearly stuck together)#rawling (words into one another)
dap diu`to flit about; to go in great numbers
dap do`to demolish, to shatter, to ruin
dap doi`From day to day,from hand to mouth
dap giong`xem nhap giong
dap lai`Retort; counter-attack
dap le`to reply, to return
dap mai`Tread
dap so`(toan) Answer
dap tan`Shatter, defeat completely dispose of devastingly
dap tat`Stamp out
dap thanh`(cu) Visit relatives'graves in spring
dap tran`Spillway
dap tu`Reply (to awelcome address, toats..)
dap ung`Satisfy, meet (a need..)
dap vo`Shatter, break up, smash
dap vui`nhu vui dap
dat`Gram, lightly#earth; soil; land; ground#expensive; dear; costly#to drift; to be driven#to laminate; to make thinner#to inlay#to lead; to tow; to guide#to live in retirement#to place; to put; to set; to depose; to lay#to command; to order#to reach; to attain
dat bai`Alluvial land (on river banks or seashores)
dat bay`Invent, fabricate
dat boi`alluvial deposits
dat bong`(the thao) Dribble
dat cat`Sandy soil, sandy land#Cultivable land (noi khai quat)
dat chong`Much wooed, much proposed to (noi ve co gai)
dat chuyen`Invent (fabricate) a story
dat coc`cung noi dat tien Advance security money
dat dan`Guide
dat dao`cung noi dao dat Overflow, overbrim
dat day`Lead to
dat de`Fabricate, invent
dat dieu`Fabricate a false story
dat diu`to go together#xem diu dat
dat do`Dear, high in cost
dat duc`enmal
dat gai`Pander
dat gia`Fix a price, estimate
dat hang`Place an order#ake (pay, leave) a deposit (for someone to keep goods... for one)#Sell well, be much in demand, be much sought after
dat hiem`(hoa hoc) Race earth
dat hoang`Fallow, waste land
dat hua`Promised land
dat khach`Enjoy large custom#Strange land, foreign land
dat lai lat ma`(ton giao) Dalai Lama
dat lien`mainland; continent
dat loi`Be listened to
dat lung`cung noi dat minh Lie down
dat mau`Rich soil
dat mui`Lead (somebody) by the nose
dat mun`Humus
dat nang`Heavy soil
dat nhe`Light soil
dat nung`Terra-cotta
dat nuoc`Home country, homeland
dat set`Clay
dat si`(cu) Self secliding scholar, recluse scholar#retired scholar
dat su`Kaolin#missing history
dat ten`to name; to give a name
dat tien`nhu dat coc
dat vong`(y hoc) Set a coil (an ultra-uterine device) (for preventing conception)
dau`(Bot) mulberry. bride; daughter-in-law; son's wife#Tan dau tan dau#ery far away#The tenth Earthly Branch (symbolized by the cock)#head#mark; sign; print. fingerprint#race; track#tamp; seal#nhu du#oil#though; although; even if; however#peck; bushel;#to battle; to fight#sore; tender; aching#ill; sick; diseased#to pass an examination to perch; to alight (of birds)#o park (of card)#o be on station (of ships)#(y hoc) variola; smallpox#bean; pea#where ; somewhere ; anywhere ; everywhere
dau an`Table oil#stamp
dau bao`Colic accompanied with lumbar pains
dau be`xem be dau
dau bep`chef
dau bo`Pig-headed, stubborn#bull-fight
dau bung`Colic
dau buon`distressed; desolate
dau ca`fish-oil
dau canh`Seat on the right hand of any player (in Vietnamese card-games)
dau cao`cung noi dau cu la, dau con ho Balm
dau cao su`elastic
dau cau`(quan ddo^.i) Bridge-head
dau cham`full stop
dau cham phay`semi-colon
dau cham than`exclamation mark
dau chan`ootprint ; footmark
dau co`Not at all#to speculate
dau co ve`French bean
dau con`(khau ngu) Daughter in law and daughter (noi khai quat)
dau con ho`xem dau cao
dau cong`lus sign
dau cu la`xem dau cao
dau da`Struggle, attack
dau dai`xem dai dau
dau dam`Dare not
dau dan`(quan ddo^.i) Nose; waar-head#Biggest of a flock (herd), cock of the walk
dau dang`chieftain; ringleader
dau dau`Be on tenterhooks, feel anxious#Everywhere, in every place#nfounded, not supported by facts, ide#Headache#Withered#own in the mouth, gloomy
dau day`Somewhere#Somewhere
dau de`Labour pain#heading; headline
dau diu`Show a conciliatory attitude (after aa fit of temper, a quarrel...)
dau doc`to poison
dau don`File an application (request, petition...)#painful; sorrowful
dau dua`Chinese pea
dau ga`Leader (in a Vietnamese card-game, after a draw)
dau gach ngang`Dash
dau gach noi`Hyphen
dau gia`ally; related family#to auction
dau giang`(am nhac) Flat
dau giao huu`(the thao) Friendly match, friendly
dau gio`Wind-swept place
dau goi`Knee
dau guom`Fense, cross swords
dau hac`ar
dau hai cham`Colon
dau hang`Surrender, capitulate
dau hieu`sign; symtom; token#adge; signal
dau hoa`kerosene, petro leum
dau hoa thi`Asterik
dau hoi`(dia phuong) nhu dau hoa#xem cham hoi#alling accent
dau hom`(dia phuong) Nightfall
dau huyen`Grave accent
dau khau`nutmeg#to argue; to dispute
dau khi`Petroleum and gas complex
dau kho`to suffer great misery ; to feel wretched
dau lan tay`Fingerprints
dau loai`(the thao) Elimination
dau long`(cu) At will,as one pleases.#cu, it dung) Tak the trouble#Elder, eldest (child)#to feel great arguish, to feel deep grief
dau luoc`Apostrophe
dau ly`o reason
dau mat`Sore eyes#cung noi dau mau Knot, node
dau mau`xem dau mat
dau mo`Lubricant#mineral-oil
dau mu`Circumflex accent
dau mua`(y hoc) small-pox
dau nang`drop tone
dau nanh`soy-bean
dau nao`Nerve-centre#Nothing of the kind, not at all
dau nau`(dia phuong) (nhu) cai dau#cu) Labour leader#Labour pains
dau nga`tilde; rising accent
dau ngoac`arenthesis
dau ngoac don`xem ngoac don
dau ngoac kep`xem ngoac kep
dau ngoac vuong`square brackets
dau nhon`Lubricant
dau niem`Seal
dau noi`Hyphen
dau oc`Mind attitude of mind
dau oi`Amniotic fluid
dau om`(cung noi) dau yeu#e ill, ail
dau phap`(the thao) Play
dau phay`comma
dau phieu`to vote; to ballot
dau phong`peanut-oil
dau phu`soya curd
dau quan`(cu)Go into the army, enlist
dau rang`nhu du rang
dau rau`Earthen tripod (for a cooking pot)
dau riu`Hoopoe(chim)
dau ruoi`Bead (of a rife-sight)
dau ruou`xem dau nghia 2
dau sac`acute accent; high tone
dau sai`Factobum
dau sao`nhu du sao#nhu du sao
dau so`chieftain, ringleader
dau ta`Vegetal oil (formerly used as a fuel in lamps)
dau tam`xem dau nghia 1
dau tay`(dia phuong) Kerosene#First (work of act)#Strawberry#finger-print
dau thai`Reincarnate
dau than`xem cham than
dau thang`Sharp
dau thanh`Holy oil#Sign of the cross
dau thanh gia`sign of the cross
dau thau`Bid forr contract, put in (make) a tender
dau thi thuc`Visa
dau thom`erfume; scent
dau thu`(cu) Give oneself up (to the police.)#Contender, player (in a competition of sport, chess...)
dau thuc vat`egetable oil
dau tich`(it dung) Vestige
dau tien`First
dau to`Denounce publicly (noi khai quat)
dau tranh`to struggle; to fight
dau tri`Measure wits (with someone, with one another)
dau truong`place where public trial are held
dau vay`For all that
dau vet`trace; vestige
dau xang`nhu xang
dau xanh`Youth youthfulness
dau xao`(cu) nhu hoi cho
dau xot`Feel,great anguish
day`(it dung) Push#bottom; soat#chain; row; line#fat#full; filled#here#jute#rope; cord; wire; string#there#thick; deep; dense#loze#to cover ; to shut down#to exile; to banish#to push; to shove; to thrust#to raise; to rise up#to rise; to get up; to wake up#to teach; to train; to educate#to turn#o face; to front
day ai`Opress, persecute, ill-treat, grind down
day ap`brimful, plentiful#nhu day ap
day bao`to rear; to elevate; to bring up
day binh`to raise croops
day boc`Insulated electric wire
day bung`Indigestion, dyspepsia
day cap`cable
day cau`Fishing-line
day chang`Ligament
day chun`Elastic
day chuyen`danh tu. chain
day com`Thick and coarse
day cong`Take great pains
day cot`nhu cot
day cu`Having spent one's period of abstinence(nguoi dan ba sau khi dde?)
day cung`Bowstring.#toan hoc) Chord
day cuong`bridle
day da`Portly, corpulent
day dac`dense
day dan`(dien) Conductor wire, conducting-wire#Plump-faced, plump-cheeked, full-faced#pright, honourable#Thick and densely made-up#cung noi dan day Inured to (hardships, difficulties...)
day dat`(radio) Ground#Resounding (noi ve tieng reo..)
day day`Flatly#abound in#xem day (lay)#xem day day
day diem`Cover (against dust..)
day dien`Electric wive
day do`Cord and string (noi khai quat)#Here and there#Teach affectionnately, admonish affectionately (young people)
day doa`to ill-treat; to misure
day doi`(khau ngu) Speak in a superior tone, speak with a superior air, talk like a Dutch uncle#Plumb-line
day du`complete; sufficient; adequate
day dua`anh ta het suc day dua#e fought like a wild cat#to drag on; to drag out
day dut`Harass
day giac`Sleep one's fil
day giay`shoe-lace; shoe-string
day hoc`Teach (at a school...)
day hoi`Flatulent
day ke`Teach a hight class (than the one is qualified for)
day kem`Tutor
day kem gai`barbed wire
day khon`Teach one's grandmother to suck eggs
day leo`(bot) liana; creeper
day loan`to revolt; to rebel
day lui`cung nhu day lui#oll back, push back, drive back#heck
day lung`belt; waistband
day manh`Push up, step up, speed up#opush up production
day men`o ferment
day muc`chalk line
day mui`Neat's lead (tied to the nose)#Smelling, stinking
day nay`Here you are
day nga`o push down
day nghia`(cu) Raise the Great Cause banner
day nghien`to grumble; to complain in a sullen
day noi`telephone
day oan`(van chuong, cu) Ties of misfortune
day oi`(dia phuong) nhu day oi #Have in profusion,be choke-full with
day phe`Brimful
day phoi`Clothes-line
day quan`cung noi day binh Raise troops
day ray`xem day day
day ruot`Be infuriated, be enraged at (by)
day song`(sinh vat) Notochord#hordata
day tay`trawberry
day thang`Exactly one month old (of a baby)
day thep`(cu) nhu buu dien#ron wire
day thep gai`Barbed wire
day thi`pubecent; puberal
day to`Servant#gent, hireling#xem day to 
day to hong`(thuc vat) Doder#arriage ties
day toc`Hairspring
day tran`Overflowing, overbrimming
day tu`to teach privately, to turtor
day tui`Line one's pocket (purse) full
day tuoi`Exactly one year old (of a baby)
day xich`chain
de`(bot) chestrut#(cu) I, me (Tu dung tu xung mot cach than mat khi noi voi#cu) Order, rank#ubmit, lay#(thuc vat) Cinnamon#Curlew (chim)#Lumpy (noi ve dat)#Dyke#himble#Step aside#Support; sole#anvil#cricket#easy; facile#goat#Satyr#con de#subject#to write#to bear; to press#to bring forth; to give birth to (child) to throw ; to drop (of animals)#to place; to cut; to set; to stand#o let; to leave; to keep#to stint To eat stintingly To spare; to expect
de an`Program, scheme
de bao`docile; obedient
de bat`Promote
de be`ragile; brittle
de biu`slight, sneer at
de bung`cung nhu 4de long Have (something) in one's mind
de cao`Give prominence to, think highly of#eighten
de cap`Deal with, touch upon
de che`(dia phuong) nhu de tang#Monarchy
de chiu`agreeable; comfortable; cosy
de cho`In order that, in order to, so that, so as to
de chung`Guard against#oresee the eventuality of#Possibly, probably; maybe
de coi`comely; agreeable to see
de cu`lusful; lascivious#to nominate
de cua`Leave (money or property) to somebody.#cu) Bury one's wealth
de cuong`Draff of the fundamentals (of a political platform...)
de dai`easy-going; accommodating
de dan`(cu) Introductory
de dang`Courteous, gentle#easy; fluent
de danh`to save; to economize
de dat`Propose to higher levels, put forward for consideration to higher levels#cautious; careful
de dau`contrary to what is expected; unexpecdly
de dieu`(it dung) Expose to shame#Dykes and dyke-maintenance
de do`Imperial (royal) capital
de doa`to threaten; to menace
de doc`(cu) Commander of a provincial army
de don`o lay a petition
de du`(van hoc) Synecdoche
de dui`Mole-Cricket
de dum`Save (economize) money
de ga`(dong vat) Woodcock
de ghet`abominable; execrable
de gi`Not easy, not sure
de giun`Snipe (chim)
de hen`mean; base; vile
de hieu`Easy to understand#Name of a king's (emperor's) reign
de hinh`Hoi dong de hinh#rime commission
de hoang`Born out of wedlock, bastard
de hue`Go in crowds#cu) Be in harmony
de khang`Resist#xem de khang
de khoi`Be first to propose, be first to suggest, be first to put forward
de khong`Leave empty, leave unused
de kinh`nhu de do
de lai`(cu) Headclerk of district mandarin's office#nhu de nghia 7
de lo`Let out
de loi`nh de doa
de long`nhu de bung
de ma`In order to, in order that, so that, so as to
de mat`Keep a keen eye on#Let be, leave alone#Vile, mean
de me`Be under the spell of (love..)
de muc`Heading, head of chapter#ubric
de nen`o command; to control; to restrain
de nghe`Pleasant to the ears, palatable#easonalble, sensible
de nghi`propose; to suggest
de nguoi`(cu hoac dia phuong) Think little of, slight#asy#to disregard
de nhuc`Ignominous deed
de non`Be born prematurely; be delivered prematurely
de ot`(dia phuong; khau ngu) Very easy
de phong`to prevent; to take precaution
de quai`Small dyke surrounding a big one
de quoc`empire
de roi`Be delivered on route to hospital, be borrn on route to hospital
de sen`Be parsimonious
de so`Grim, repulsive, disgusting#dia phuong) Extremely
de tai`Subject, theme
de tang`Dedicate#Wear mourning for, be in mourning for
de thuong`Possibly, probably#lovely; amiable; agreeable
de tien`Abject, ignoble
de tinh`Easy-going, easy to please, complaisant#Gentle
de trinh`to refer, to submit
de tu`Epigraph#disciple
de tua`Write a preface, write a foreword
de vi`The throne, royalty
de vinh`Write a poem under the inspiration of a scenery's beauty
de vuong`king; emperor
de xen`o be parsimonious; to save little by little
de xuat`Put forward (for discussion)
de y`to pay attention; to regard; to take notice of
dech`(tuc) nhu dach
dem`(am nhac) to accompany#night#o bring; to carry#to count; to number ; to enumerate
dem chac`(mia) Count and recount
dem dan`nhu dem nghia 3
dem hom`Late night, late during the night
dem khuya`Late night and small hours ofthe morning
dem lai`o bring about
dem long`Entertian the feeling of
dem nay`onight
dem ngay`day and night
dem sang`Carry over (trong ke toan)
dem than`Risk one's life
dem theo`Take [with one]
dem toi`Night
dem trang`Sleepless night
dem truong`van chuong) Long night
dem ve`to take in
dem xia`Take notice of, take into account, take account of
den`(dia phuong,y hoc) Thrush#y hoc) Rachitic, rickety#black; unlucky#lamp; light#temple#to compensate for ; to make up for#to arrive; to come; to get in#o reach; to attain#xem gien
den bac`Ungrateful
den bam`nhu den pin
den bao`Hurricane-lamp
den boi`Repay someone for his favours
den bu`Compensate for (someone's trouble..)
den chieu`Magic lantern, projector
den chop`(anh) Flash
den chua`Pagodas, Buddhist temples(noi khai quat)
den cung`To a finish, to the bitter end
den dai`Temples, sanctuaries and shrines
den dap`Pay one's debt of gratitude
den dat`Acetylen lamp, carbide lamp
den den`xem den (lay)
den det`xem det (lay)#xem det (lay)
den dien`electric lamp; electric light
den dieu`Not short of anything
den do`Red light#cung nhu do den Chance, luck (in gambling)
den dom`Lamp,lights,lighting
den dui`Black#ad, unlucky
den duoc`nhu den dom
den gio`Up to now, hitherto#It's time
den gion`Attractively tawny
den hay`Quite interesting#unny, old
den kit`Black, inky-black
den mang`Pay retributive compensation for a murder
den mang song`Mantle lamp
den ngay`Due, mature#ear her time
den nghit`Very crowed, overcrowed
den ngom`Picth-black, picth-dark
den nhanh`Shining black
den noi`About, soon#cung nhu den doi#o such an axtent that, to such a degree that#oo, at all
den on`Repay (someone)for his favour
den ong`neon light
den pin`flash-lamp
den rong`Royal palace
den sach`(cu) Midnight oil
den si`Very black
den thang`nhu den ngay nghia 2 
den the`So
den thi`Nubile
den toi`dark#to pay for one's sin
den treo`Hanging oil lamp
den troi`(cu) Wisdom (foresight,enlightenment) of highter level(concerning the lower levels' grievances)
den tuoi`to come of age
den vach`wall sconce
den xanh`Green light
den xep`Chinese lamtern
den xi`blowlamp
denh`Overflow#ounce up
denh dang`(dia phuong) Cumbrously big#(it dung) nhu denh dang
denh doang`Be lost in#nsubstantial, empty#Lukewarm, tepid#nhu duenh doang
deo`(it dung) Wrinkled, puckered#(tuc)Fuck#ot a bloody damn#mountain pass#to carry ; to take along with#soft; flexible; plastic#to carry; to wear; to put on#to cut; to squeeze (money)
deo bong`Be burdened with#to be burdened with
deo chan`Light-footed
deo dai`resistant; enduring
deo dang`Showing litheness,apparently lithe (thuong noi ve dong tac)
deo deo`Hang on to, remain glued to#xem deo (lay)
deo duoi`to pursue; to follow up
deo got`Whittle carefullyat#olish
deo hang`Luggage - rack
deo mom`Glib; talkative
deo queo`(khau ngu)#ery lithe
deo suc`ntiring; tireless
dep`(cu) Basket#dia phuong) Quire (of paper)#beautiful; handsome; fair; pretty#sandal#to repress; to quell
dep de`Beautiful, fine (noi khai quat)
dep doi`Making a nice couple, well-as-sorted
dep duyen`Make a match of
dep lao`Hale and hearty
dep loan`o quell a revolt
dep long`satisfied, pleased
dep ma`Having showy appearance
dep mat`Be credit to, be a gloryto, do honour to#hame#spectacular, nice
dep tan`o crush out
dep trai`Handsome (noi ve dan ong)
dep y`Pleased, content
det`Flat#Stunted, scrubby#ap (with some playing cards)#to weave#to whip#dried up
det gam`o brocade
det kim`Hang det kim#nitwear
deu`even; regular; steady#ill-bred; vulgar
deu cang`(thong tuc) Very caddish, very blackguardly
deu dan`Regular, balanced
deu deu`Monotonous
deu gia`nh deu
deu nhau`equal
di`aunt#odd; strange#prostitude; courtesan#scrotum#to go; to walk; to depart#o lead; to march; to play#to move to leave behind; to crush with feet by rubbing#to take, to employ#to whisper#xem gi
di ban`Variant
di biet`Leave forever
di bo`to walk
di bo doi`Join the (communist) army
di bom`Lustful, wanton
di but`posthumous writing
di can`(y hoc) Matastasis
di cao`(it dung) Posthumous manuscript
di cau`(dia phuong) Go to stool
di chan`nhu di bo
di chan dat`cung noi di chan khong To go (walk) barefoot 
di chat`ifferent nature
di chi`(cu) nhu tham chi#Archaeological site
di chieu`(cu) King's last will
di choi`to go out, to be out
di chuc`will; testament
di chung`(y hoc) Sequela#foreign race; alien race
di chuyen`to transfer; to move; to displace
di cot`Bones, remains
di cu`to emigrate; to migrate
di cui`Fetch wood (in the forest)
di dai`Make water, have a pee
di dan`emigrant; immigrant
di dang`strange form; deformity
di dao`to sholl, to go for a walk
di dat`Go (walk) barefoot
di day`Be deported, be banished
di dem`Go out of one's house at night
di det`Pop sporadically and dully
di dich`(it dung) Move (more or less in terms of position)#lter somewhat
di diem`Prostiture, whore
di doan`superstition
di doi`Go to the dog; go bust#Go together, match
di dom`Humorouus, witty
di dong`Similar and dissimilar#mobile; roving
di duc`Lecher, promiscuous man, gigolo
di dung`Boom in salvoes, bang in salvoes#Have a gait (in some way)
di duong`(sinh vat) Heterotrophic#Entertain, divert
di ghe`step-mother
di giai`make water, urinate
di giao`Heterodox creed; heresy
di hai`Aftermaths#eave aftermaths#relics; remains
di han`(it dung) Hand down a posthumous resentment
di hinh`Heteromorphism#eteromorphic
di hoa`Su di hoa#atabolism, katabolism#to bring misfortunes on
di huan`(trang trong) Last instructions, last message, last recommendation (given before death)
di huong`(vat ly) Anisotropic
di khoi`(dia phuong) nhu di vang
di kiet`Be affected by dysentery
di ky`trange; extraordinary
di lai`Be on intimate terms#ave intimate relation with each other, entertain intimacy with
di lam`to go to work ; to go to business
di linh`(cu) Go soldiering
di luy`Make (cause) trouble for the comming generations
di menh`Last will
di mieng`Fond of telling broad stories
di nam`Go to bed, go to rest
di nat`o grind
di nghi`Take (have) a rest; go to rest#pend one's holiday#objection; coutrary opinion
di ngoai`nhu di ia
di ngon`Last words; last will
di ngu`o go to bed
di nhan`extraordinary man
di nhien`naturally; of course
di phuoc`ister of Mercy
di qua`Pass, go past
di ra`Go out of one's house#ischarge (from one's bowels)
di rac`(cu) Veteran harlot veteran whore
di rua`Get diarrhoea
di san`legacy; heritage
di sau`Delve, go deep
di ta`Suffer from cholera
di tan`Evacuate
di tang`Bequeath
di tat`(y hoc) Sequela#Malformation#Take a short-cut
di tay`Go west, kick the bucket#mia) Be bust, go to pot
di thoa`Of very easy virtue, very promiscuous, very wanton (noi ve dan ba)
di thuc`Acclimatize (a plant)
di thuong`extraordinary; strange
di tich`vestiges; remains
di tieu`nhu di dai#nhu di ia
di tinh`Of easy virtue, light#Spermatorrhoea
di to`Mate (a sow)
di toc`(it dung) Alien race, alien ethnic group
di trai`(dia phuong) Dandy
di tron`o flee; to fly
di tru`to immigrate; to migrate; to change one's address
di truyen`hereditary
di truyen hoc`Genetics
di tu`Go to prison#Take the vow, go into a monastery, go into a nunnery.
di tuan`Go on a round, go on patrol
di tuong`(it dung) Freakish appearance, queer appearance
di tuot`(noi ve tre em)
di ung`Allergy
di vang`Divan; couch#absent#the past; former times
di vat`relic#strange thing; extraneous body
di vong`Take a roundabout route#(thong tuc) Testicle, balls (xem sa di).#(thong tuc) Give a talking to, talk to, dress down
di xu`(cu, it dung) Leave a bad name (reputation)
dia`(colloq) glance (+at)#Leech#Plate, dish#hainwheel (of a bycicle)#iscus#dish; plate#iscus#isk; disc#pond
dia ba`cung noi dia bo Land register, cadastre
dia ban`(cu) 1 Compass#ield of action, area (of activity)
dia bay`lying saucer
dia bo`nhu dia ba
dia cac`Chin area (in physiognomy)
dia cau`globe; earth
dia chan`Seism
dia chan hoc`Seismology
dia chan ke`Seismometer
dia chan ky`Seismograph
dia chanh`(dia phuong)
dia chat`cung noi dia chat hoc Geology 
dia chi`(cu) Monography#Earthly Branch#address, direction, destination
dia chinh`(cu) Land office
dia chu`Landlord, landlady, landowner
dia cuc`Earth's poles
dia danh`Place name
dia dao`tunnel
dia dau`Border area (of two localities)
dia diem`point; location
dia do`Map
dia du`(cu) Geography
dia gioi`Border, frontier, border line
dia hoa hoc`Geochemistry
dia ly hoc`eography
dia mao`Geomorphology
dia nguc`hell
dia oc`(tu cu) Real estate
dia oc ngan hang`(tu cu) Land-bank
dia phuong`Region,area (is a country)
dia sinh`(dia ly) Subterranean
dia tang`ayer, strata (stratum)
dia the`Terrain (with regard to its conformation)
dia tu`Geomagnetism
dia vi`position; rank
dia vuc`(tu cu) Territory
dia y`(thuc vat) lichen
dich`Enemy, adversary,foe#ope with, deal with, macth#mark; target; aim butt#to translate; to turn#o decode#(rud) epidemic juice; liquid; fluid
dich am`(cu) Transcribe phonetically
dich ban`(cu) Translation
dich dang`Very deserving, just
dich danh`real name
dich gia`translator
dich giong`(am nhac) Transpose
dich hach`(y hoc) plague; bubonic plague
dich hau`Enemy rear, rear of the enemy lines
dich hoa`Enemy-inflictes destruction, enemy-iflited devastation
dich hoan`Testis, testicle
dich ma`Decode, decypher
dich mau`Legitimate mother (one's father legitimate wife)
dich quan`Enemy army, enemy (adverse) troops
dich ta`(y hoc) cholera
dich te`(y hoc) Epidemic
dich te hoc`Epimiology
dich than`In person
dich thi`Very
dich thu`Adversary, opponet,rival
dich thuat`Translate (noi khai quat)
dich thuc`Authentic
dich ton`Eldest son of one's eldest son
dich vi`Gastric juice
dich vu`Service
dich xac`Factual#ertain
diec`(dia phuong) xem nhiec#Deaf#tunted#ud#heron
diem`Edging#Observation post, watch-post#match salt; sulphur#point, dot#ark#ot
diem bau`Calico, plain cotton cloth
diem dai`ell; hades
diem dan`Salt worker
diem dien`(cu) Salt marsh
diem dua`Spruce, smart
diem le`charming; dazzling beautiful
diem phu`(cu) Palace of the King of Hell; hell
diem phuc`felicity; bliss
diem sinh`Sulphur
diem su`Beautiful love history
diem tieu`Saltpetre
diem tinh`love
diem vuong`king of hell
dien`(ket hop han che) Land, field#ill in#Classic reference#thong tuc) Like a swell you look!#Eletricity#lectric current#ourt Hall (where the throne is)#emple#Mad, out of one's mind, insane#abid#to act; perform#o take place; to occur#to deck out in#aspect; area
dien am`(cu) nhu phien am
dien bien`Evolve unfold,happen#appening,development
dien ca`(it dung) Put into plain verse#lain verse
dien cam`Expressive
dien cuong`Rabid, frenze ied
dien dai`(cu) Speaker's platform,pulpit,rostrum#Insane,mad
dien dam`Talk face-to-face
dien dan`platform; forum
dien dat`express
dien dich`to deduce
dien dien`Cork
dien don`(am nhac) Solo
dien gia`speaker; orator
dien giai`to explain
dien giang`Lecture on
dien khung`Fly into a rage, be enraged
dien kien`Have a personal interview with somebody
dien loan`Hysterical; delirious
dien mao`face; countenance
dien nghia`Novelize, make into a historical novel (a legend, history..)
dien ro`foolish
dien ta`to describe; to express
dien tap`Stage a sham battle, perform manoeuvres#ehearse
dien tau`Perform, execute (a musical work)
dien thoai`Telephone
dien thoai vien`Telephonist
dien thuyet`to deliver a speech; to give a lecture
dien tich`Classic reference#Electric charge#area
dien tien`(it dung) Evolve#In front of
dien tiet`Boil over with anger, foam with rage, fly into a passion
dien tu`Electromagnetic#Electron#Welcoming address
dien tu hoc`Electromagnetism#Electronics
dien van`speech; address
dien vien`Actor
dien xuat`Perform; act
diep`(thuong goi rau diep) Lettuce#(tu cu) Official message, official letter.#van chuong,cu) Butterfly#epeat (like a refrain)#Mould-board (of a plough)
diep ca`(thuc vat) Houttuynia
diep luc`Chlorophyl
diep thach`Schist
diep xoan`(thuc vat) Chicory
diet`to destroy; to exterminate
diet chung`to exterminate a race
diet co`Herbicide
diet khuan`o sterilize
diet sinh`Biocide
diet sinh thai`Ecocide
diet tru`Exterminate, root out
diet vong`to perish
diet xa hoi`Sociocide
dieu`Figure; carriage.#er face was melancholy like a chrysanthemum anf her firure thin like an apricot spray#edoly#une,air#thong tuc) Mannered, giving oneself fine airs#atch off#March past#Pipe, hubble-bubble pipe, hookah#ondole on somebody's death, present condolences on somebody's death#Prone to lying, untruthful#Word, sentence#act, even, occurrence, happening#oint, clause#retext#effective#kite paper-kite
dieu binh`o prade; to march past
dieu hau`hawk
dieu ke`Very effective trick
dieu khoan`Clause, provition
dieu kien`Condition, terms
dieu luat`Article of law
dieu muop`Harrier
dieu tra`Investigate, inquire, take a census of#Untruthful and craftly
dieu uoc`Treaty
dieu vo duong oai`Show off strength#xem dieu vo duong oai
dieu voi`far; remote; complicated
dim`(it dung) Half-close (one's eyes)#to hush up; to suppress#xem nhim
dinh`communal house in the village#to stop ; to stay; to delay, to put off#palace; official residence#small boat#sticky; gluey; gummy#to stick; to glue#o be involed in#to enclose; to attach#to fix; to appoint; to set; to assign#to nail#top; peak; summit; tip; crown
dinh ba`(tu cu) village's young men's regidter#Treident
dinh ban`Suspend (a paper); suspend the publication and disseminetion (of a book)
dinh bung`to intend, to tend (to do)
dinh canh`Settled agriculture
dinh chi`Suspend somebody, to suspen somebody in his work
dinh chien`to cease fire
dinh chinh`Correct (a false piece of news); make corrigenda (in a book)
dinh chung`Luxutious living, high living
dinh co`Large private estalishment (mostly consisting of building on an extensive piece of land...)
dinh cong`to strike; to go out; to go on strike
dinh cu`fixed residence; fixed home
dinh cuu`(tu cu) Shelve a lawsuit
dinh dac`Diginified and serious
dinh dang`to concern
dinh dap`(khau ngu) nhu dinh dang
dinh de`Postulate
dinh dien`to cultivate new lands
dinh dinh`xem dinh (lay)
dinh doat`Decide, determine
dinh duong`nutritious; nourishing
dinh ghim`Pin
dinh gia`Fix a price, set a price, set a price on
dinh giao`(tu cu) Eastablish ties of friendship with
dinh han`Set the deadline to
dinh hinh`Thuoc dinh hinh (anh)#ixative
dinh hoan`(tu cu) Potspone, put off adjourn
dinh hon`Collect one's wits#to promise to marry
dinh huong`Close (kind of spice)#to orient
dinh huynh`(khau ngu) nhu dang hoang
dinh ket`Agglutinate
dinh khoi`(tu cu) nhu dinh nguyen
dinh khuy`Ring-headed woodscrew
dinh kien`Ficed idea
dinh le`Fixed convention
dinh lieu`Make arrangenments for
dinh liu`Be involved in, have connection with (something unpleasant)
dinh luat`law
dinh luong`Determine the amount of#uantitative
dinh luy`(it dung) Barracks and bastions (thoi xua; noi khai quat).#bong) Stronghold
dinh ly`heorem
dinh mang`estiny; predestination
dinh menh`Predestined fate, predestinedation
dinh mep`(khau ngu) Not worth eating, too little
dinh muc`Norm
dinh nghia`to define,#definition
dinh ngo`(it dung) Bright-looking, intelligen-looking (thuong noi ve tre em)
dinh ngon`(dong vaat) Syndactyl
dinh ngu`(ngon ngu) Predicate
dinh nguyen`(tu cu) First laureate at Court competition - examination
dinh oc`screw
dinh phan`Predestined lot
dinh so`Permanent dwelling-place, fixed adress
dinh than`Compose oneself#Courtiers, court officials
dinh thi`(tu cu) nhu thi dinh
dinh thuc`(toan hoc) Determinant
dinh tinh`qualitative
dinh uoc`(ngoai giao) Agreement; act#Be engaged to each other
dinh vi`to locate
dip`(dia phuong) xem nhip#occasion; chance; opportunity
dit`bottom; posterior; backside#to break wind; to fart
diu`(dia phuong) xem nhiu#cung nhu diu Carry (one's child) pick-a-back astride on one's hip with a cloth band#nhu diu#solf; sweet#ess acute; less tense#to lead by the hand
diu dang`sweet; graceful
diu dat`now presto now largo#to guide, to lead
diu diu`xem diu (lay)
diu giong`Lower the tone, soften the tone
diu hien`Gentle
diu hiu`gloomy
diu ngot`Solf and sweet
do`Be speechless from shortage of argument#Degree; measure#bout, in the region of#Dirty; unclean; mucky#to raise (hand.)#Protruding#Red#Rhamnoneuron (cay)#Small string#Stiff#To pass an examination#o stop (of car)#To pour; to spill#o fall; to collapse; to fall in; to collapse#o throw; to shift; to impute#bird snare#to fathom; to round; to detect by sounding#o collate; to compare#ferry; ferry-boat#motionless#nhu kinh do (noi tat)# (musical note)#khau ngu) Well-built, muscular; athletic#that; there; those#thing; object; article#to coax; to sooth; to comfort#to compare; to compete#to defy#to measure; to measure of; to measure out#to parry; to ward off; to turn aside to prop; to hold up; to relieve#to stay; to satisfy for a time#to pledge#to unload; to dischage from a ship#o unroof#unfinished; un completed#ncapable; unskillful
do an`Plan, desig#food; aliment
do au`Bright and cheerful red
do bac`(tu cu) Gambling
do ban`Dirty (noi khai quat)#Map#rawing, design
do be`(dia phuong) nhu do vo
do benh`Pass on one's disease (particularly V.D.)
do bieu`Diagram, graph
do bo`Land#waste, abundancy
do bua`(khau ngu)Be half-way through one's meal, have not finished with one's meal. Eat out of the usual time
do bung`Flare up#lush, flush up (with shame, out of shyness...)
do choi`Dazzlingly bright red#plaything, toy
do chot`Staring red
do chu`Word-puzzle
do chung`(khau ngu) Half-way through#About#Guess, estimate
do co`Antique, antiquities
do cung`Offering
do da`Thoi dai do da#he stone age
do da do dan`xem do dan (lay)
do dac`Survey (land)#funiture; furnishings; effect
do dam`Grope
do dan`Give a friendly hand, assist#In the pink, healthy-looking#silly; cretinous#stupid
do dang`Accomplice,partisan#Unfinished uncompleted, halfdone, inconclusive#shameless; disgraceful
do danh`Soothe (someone) into obedience, soothe (someone) into listening to one, coax
do dat`Measure one's length#Pass examinations, graduate (noi khai quat)
do dau`to sponsor
do day`Everywhere#Help (somebody) stand up (sit up)#nhu ban thiu
do de`Deliver (a woman in childbirth)#Disciple
do den`Gambling#Light up
do do`Consequently, hence
do doc`(tu cu) Commander-in-chief#dmiral#Quite red
do doi`Shameful
do don`Flock into, concentrate upon
do dong`On the average#Thoi dai do dong#he bronze Age#ronze Age
do du`to hesitate; to waver
do dua`Barcarolle (dieu hat)
do dung`Ustensil, appliance,implement,article
do duong`xem do
do gay`Crimson
do gia`Counterfeit; imitations
do giang`River and ferry; boat and sampans (noi khai quat)
do gom`Pottery,ceramics
do guom`Cross (measuring) swords
do hay`Rosy, ruddy
do ho`To dominate; to control; to rule
do hoa`Drawing
do hoe`Redish
do hoi`Hub of commerce, beehive, business centre#Roll#cracked; oddish#to seek information; to inquire into
do hon`Blood-red, blood coloured
do hong`nhu do
do khau`Keep one's soul and body together
do khuon`Cast
do kinh`Longitude
do loi`Answer in another's stead, answer on another's behalf#Impute the blame (to someone)
do luoi`Lose the power of speech from serious illness
do luong`Determine weights and, measures#Kind and generous
do mat`Blush,redden, colour
do mau`To shed; to spill; to blood
do mo hoi`Sweat, perspire
do moi`xem an do moi
do nat`Fall to pieces, be in ruin, collapse
do ngang`Ferry, ferry boat
do nghe`tools
do ngot`o beguile by sweet promises
do nguoi`Cracked
do nhao`Fall, topple, be over thrown
do nhe`(thong tuc) Relieve someone of
do nho`(tu cu) Theacher,tutor(of chinese language)
do om`Very bad
do quanh`Pass the buck round, shift the responsibility round
do quyen`water-rail
do ra`o evolve
do riet`Put the blame on (only one person) put the sole blame on
do sat`(tu cu) Court inspector#Thoi dai do sat#he iron Age
do so`Grand, grandiose;imposing
do su`China,chinaware,porcelain
do ta`Heave hodo
do tang`Mourning
do tay`At work, engaged
do te`Butcher
do thai`sreal
do tham`to spy
do than`Be reduced to utter misery#To earn one's living
do thanh`Royal (imperial) capital#apital; city
do the`Save mankind from sufferings (theo dao Phat)
do thi`(cung noi) do thoi Tide over the current difficult time#Graph. sine curve#city
do thi hoa`(tu cu) Urbanise
do thong`(tu cu) Head of the army
do thu quan`(tu cu) Library
do thua`Lefttovers,remnant#Shift the blame for one's action on someone else
do tia`Purple
do toi`(nghia xau) Silly thing; good- for -nothing
do tri`Assist and preserve (noi' ve mot suc thien lieng)
do truoc`In the past
do truong`(tu cu) Lord Mayor
do tuoi`carlet
do ung`Blusing, reddening
do uong`Drink;beverage
do uy`(tu cu) King's aid-de-camp
do van`knock-out
do vat`Object,things#wrestler
do vi`Latitude
do vong`Pray for the ascent of a soul to virnava, say a requiem mass
do xet`to investigate; to observe discreetly
doa`(ky thuat) Smooth (enlarge) the bore (of the tube..); bore#(usually used in front of a name of nice flower)#anish#o menace; to intimidate#xem noi doa
doa dam`Threaten, intimidate (noi khai quat)
doa day`o maltreat; to ill-treat
doa nat`to threaten; to intimidate
doai`Remember with longing#Condenscend. deign#Strech#The eight-sign figuge#ccident, west
doai tuong`to think of
doan`Section; pant ; portion; passage; Paragraph#To cut#Short#custom#group; party; hand; crops#to guess; to conjecture; to divine
doan bo`Headquarter
doan chinh`serious; decent
doan chung`Infer (fro what is known)
doan dao`Cutlass
doan dau dai`Scaffold
doan gia`Make a positive affirmation o uncertainn grounds
doan hau`Attack in the rear#Without male issue#dia phuong) Unfaithfull, inconstant
doan ket`To unite; to combine
doan kiem`Bayonet
doan mach`Short circuit
doan mai`(tu cu) Sell definnitively
doan menh`Short life
doan mo`Guess willdy
doan nhiet`(vat ly) Adiabatic
doan phong`Conecture
doan tang`Go out of mourning, leave off mourning
doan the`organization, union
doan thien`Short literary composition, short novel, novelette
doan trang`Crrect and decent
doan trinh`Chaste and decent
doan truoc`to foretell; to foresee; to anticipate
doan truong`Head delegate, delegation's leader#ommander of a multi-unit group of soldiers#Painful
doan tu`reunite
doan tuyet`to break off
doan vien`member, union member
doang`Be wide apart#thuong noi ve chan)
doanh`(cu; van chuong) Watercourse#Pop, crack#full; abundant
doanh dien`(cu) xem dinh dien nghia 1
doanh loi`profitableness
doanh nghiep`trade; business
doanh so`Turn-over
doanh thu`Receipts.doanh thuong#cu) Go in for trade, be a trade
doanh trai`billet; barracks
doat`To grab; to snatch; to seize; to win; to take by force
doat chuc`o dismiss; to remove from office
doat vi`Usurp the throne
doc`(tu cu) Headmaster#(noi tat doc_to) doctor#econdary shool teacher#ip (of a sword, stick)#rod, urge#(tuc tiu) Clitoris#Tonkin mangosteen beam; stem#along; lenghthwise#Toxic; poisonous; noxious#o read; to pronounce; to deliver (a speech)#slope; ineline#sloping#to slope; to dip#untrue, lie
doc am`For a single drinker (of teapot)
doc ban`(tu cu) Reader (textbook)
doc binh`Big flower-vase (never displayed in pair)
doc canh`Monoculture
doc chat`Toxicant
doc chat hoc`Toxicology
doc chi`to do one's utmost
doc chiem`Monopolize
doc chung`Grow restive, grow worse in the character
doc cong`Foreman
doc dao`Only way, only path (to an objective)#Original
doc dinh`Having only a son
doc doan`Arbitrary
doc dua`Mui doc dua# straight nose#xem ran doc dua
doc dung`Abrupt
doc duong`n the way
doc gia`reader
doc hai`harmful, noxious, baneful
doc hoc`Provincial education officer (thoi thuoc Phap)
doc ke`Wicked scheme, perfidious plot
doc lap`Independent
doc mieng`Viperish-tongued
doc moc`Thuyen doc moc#iragua
doc mung`Indian taro#hick and fleshy petiole of Indian taro
doc nguoc`Turn (something) upside down
doc nhat`unique, single
doc ong`Empty one's bamboo pipe saving bank of its contents; empty one's purse
doc phu su`Cochinchinese district chief (thoi thuoc Phap)
doc quyen`Monopoly#ole, exclusive
doc suat`Oversee, supervise
doc tai`Dictatorial
doc tau`Perform a solo
doc than`single; celibate
doc than giao`Monotheism
doc thoai`Monologue
doc thuc`Urge
doc tinh`Toxicity
doc to`(tu cu) Medical doctor#Toxin
doc ton`Being the object of monolatry
doc troi`Unhealthy weather
doc tui`Empty one's pocket
doc van`Monorhymed
doi`(tuc tiu) Arse#Bat; flittermouse#Bowl#Distance; space; measure#Hill#In excess (of requirement or average)#e left in excess#Plumb#dia phuong) Hurl violenty (a hard thing again anothe)#Silt bank (along a river or on an estuary)#romontory, headland#Sulk#To carry on one's head#o jack; to wear#Team#To change; to exchange; to alter#o convert; to transfer#Zone#black pudding; sausage#to throw up#contrary to; opposite to#life; existence; world#escent; generation#pair; two; double#promontory; headland#tinh tu to be hungry#to claim back; to demand; to ask; to require#o summon; to subpoena#to follow closely; to pursue#to lie; to deceive#carelessly done#to move; to transfer#to pour (water); to bound; to resound; to kick#to wait for; to await
doi ba`A few
doi bai`Debauched; depraved
doi bang`Be the last passman (on the passlist)
doi ben`Both sides
doi bung`nhu doi
doi cach`(ngon ngu) Accusative
doi chac`to exchange, to barter
doi chan`(cu, kieu cach) Leave, go off
doi chat`Confront
doi chieu`Compare, confront
doi cho`xem cho doi
doi choi`Face up (to someone)#e in contrast
doi chung`Confront with the witnesses#ontrol
doi chut`A little bit
doi co`To spat; to contend
doi cong`Mutual help (a kind of low-level co-operative)
doi da`(khau ngu) Careless
doi dao`Abumdant; profuse; plentiful
doi dien`To confront
doi doi`Have (live) a new life#eternally; perpetually; for ever
doi giong`Change one's tone; change the gamut
doi got`(cu, kieu cach) nhu doi chan
doi hinh`Formation; line-up
doi hoi`Exact, clain more than oe's due#equire, need#equirement#Have friendly talk with each other
doi kem`Dearth [of food], famine
doi khang`Antagonistic
doi khi`(xem) doi luc sometimes, occasionally
doi kho`Needy, necessitous#Proverty-stricken
doi lan`Interchange
doi lap`In opposition; contrary
doi lot`Use as a cloak, under the cloak of
doi lua`Wedded pair, the happy pair
doi luu`Convection#xchange (goods)
doi mach`Gossip
doi moi`Innovate; renovate#nnovation, renovation#Tortoise-shell#awk's bill turtle
doi muoi`Twentyish#Vespertilis
doi nam`(the thao) Men's doubles
doi nam nu`(the thao) Mixed doubles
doi nao`never
doi ngau`Feel the gnawing pains of hunger
doi ngoai`foreign
doi ngu`Line-up
doi nguoi`Human life, human existence
doi noi`domestic
doi nu`(the thao) Wonmen's doubles
doi pho`To face; to cope; to deal with
doi phuong`Opposite side, opponent, adversary
doi qua`Flying fox (bat)
doi quan`Army
doi quy`Vampire[-bat]
doi sach`Counter-tactics
doi so`Be the last on a list, be at the bottom of a list
doi song`life, livelihood, living
doi ta`The two of us (man and women)
doi tam`In one's early teens
doi te`Degenerate
doi thay`to change
doi thoai`Dialogue
doi thoi`Bide one's time
doi thu`Rival, competitor
doi thuo`(khau ngu) cung noi doi thua. Time epoch
doi tien`o change money#o demand the return of one's money
doi tra`false; deceitful
doi trong`Counterpoise, equipose
doi truong`Leader of a working gang, leader of a group (of soldiers,pinoneers...)
doi truy`Depraved
doi tu`Private life
doi tuong`Object
doi xu`nhu doi dai
doi y`Change one's mind, change one's opinion
dom`(dia phuong) nhu nhom #Anat (rectum)#False#Fish with a bamboo fish trap#amboo fish trap (placed against a current)#erve out#ew on (buttons...)#Pop (gun's noise)#Spill#Spot; blob#Spruce, neartly dressed#sputum; phlegm#to look; to peep; to pry
dom chung`o watch
dom dang`Spruce, well - groomed
dom dat`Fabricate, invent, make up (a story)
dom do`(khau ngu) Keep an inquisitive (covetous) eye on
dom dom`Luciola; fire-fly; glow-worm#xem dom (lay)
dom dop`xem dop (lay)#xem dop (lay)
dom ngo`to look at
don`(dia phuong) xem dan#Broken (noi ve gao)#Lever#Terra-cotta (china) seat; terra-cotta (china) support for flower-pots#To cut down; to chop down#To meet; to go to meet#To pad; to fill; to stuff#Two gandfuls (of rice plants after reaping)#appication; petition; request#brittle; crisp#ipple#nhu von#post#To rumonr; to get about#to accumulate; to gather#o drive into#o cram, to stuff#to clear; to arrange; to put in order#o lay; to set up#o move#xem ron 
don ai`Border post
don am`(cu) Monosyllabic
don an`Lay the table
don bac`Inconsiderate
don ban`Clear the table
don ban vi`Monometallism
don bay`Lever
don boi`(sinh vat) Haploid
don bot`cung nhu don bot (quan, cu)#ostes
don ca`Sing solo#olo
don can`balance-beam; weigh-beam
don chao`Meet, wait for and welcome
don chat`(hoa hoc) Element
don chiec`Few in number#ingle, solitary
don cu`Cite (a single fact...) as example
don dai`Circulate widely a bad piece of news, circulate widely false news
don dap`To accumulate
don dau`Wait (for someone) in front (to stop his advance..)
don dep`Tidy up, put in order (noi khai quat)
don dien`(tu cu) Plantation
don dieu`Monotonous
don doc`Alone, solitary#Supervise and speed up
don doi`cung nhu don kiep#adly-behaved, depraved#cung noi don kiep Badly-bahaved
don dong`idge-beam
don dua`Meet (someone when he arrives) and see him off (when he leaves)
don duong`Stop (someone) on his way#to open up a path
don gian`Simple
don gian hoa`Simplify
don gio`News circulated for intimidation
don hang`Install one's store, display one's good.#dia phuong) Close one's shop
don hen`vile
don kien`Petition
don kiep`nhu don doi
don luy`Bastion
don mat`Base, mean#Mean, low
don nen`Repress; pen
don rao`Take all verbal precautions
don rong`Dragon-head shaped shaft (of a palankeen)
don ruoc`Receive with consideration; welcome with high regards
don sach`to clean up; to strip bare
don so`simple
don tay`Make a visiting present to a child of#purlin
don tho`To vanish under ground
don thu`(tu cu) Be border guard
don thuan`Pure
don thuc`(toan hoc) Monomial
don thuoc`Prescription (of a physician)#Directions for use
don tiep`to receive
don tiet`(ngon ngu) Monosyllabic
don tinh`Unisexual, unisexed
don toc`Switch
don trai`(tu cu) Barracks, garrison
don trieng`nhu don ganh
don tru`To camp; to encamp
don truong`Commanding officer of a post
don tu`(triet hoc) Monad#Applications and requets (filed by people with the administration...)
don vai`shoulder pad
don vi`unit
don vot`Whipping, caning
don xeo`nhu don bay
don xoc`Sharp-ended carrying pole
don y`Aticipate someone's whishes
dong`(thuc vat) Arrowroot, Phrynium#rive; escort#dia phuong) nhu dung#At random, indirect#Back (of knife, sword...)#Cavern#To move#o touch; to collide#Heavy; rough; boisterous#East; orient#inter#Crowed; numerous; superior#To congeal; to coagulate; to freeze#Field#edium; sorcerer#iastre#opper; brass; bronze#To stagnate#cung noi linh dong Regional (thoi thuoc Phap)#current; stream#ine#train; descent#eligious order#to tow; to lower#nhu dong dong#pile; heap#storm; thunderstorm#to bang; to bump; to batter#to close; to shut#o bind (book) to build; to drive (nail) To play; to act (in a play)#to measure out (corn; etc.); to buy (rice)#xem giong
dong am`homonymous
dong bac`North-east
dong ban cau`Eastern hemisphere
dong bang`Freeze
dong binh`Mobilize troops
dong bo`(khau ngu) Be dressed up#synchronous
dong can`nhu dong luc
dong chai`Bottle
dong cham`Make personalities against, refer to, touch upon
dong chau`(van chuong, cu) Tears
dong chay`Current, flow
dong chi`Comrade#Winter solstice
dong choc`Glue together
dong chot`Set up a commanding position
dong co`motor, engine steam engine internal-combustion engine motive, motivation
dong con`Rut, be in (on) heat
dong cung`(tu cu) East palace#rown prince's residence#rown prince
dong dac`Solidify#ense with people#loud and dignified; sedately
dong dai`Hoop (a barrel)#prolix; lengthy
dong dan`Populous, densely populated
dong danh tu`(ngon ngu) Gerund
dong dao`crowded, full#elysium, fairy abode#nhu dao dong
dong dat`earthquake, seism
dong dau`Swine - fever#ppend one's seal; seal; stamp
dong day`Move, stir
dong di`(y xau) Sexually aroused (noi ve dan ba)
dong dien`Electric current
dong dinh`Nail up
dong do`Set up the capital (of a kingdom) (in a given place)#utstay one's welcome
dong doi`(cu) Lineage, descent
dong dong`Slender#The rice plants are already inear
dong du`(su hoc) [Movement to] go to Eastern countries (Japan and China) for higher study#In full numbers
dong dua`Shifty, dishonest
dong duc`Be in rut#Be on heat, (my) be in heat#dense
dong dung`Use in emergency
dong duoc`Oriental medicament
dong giong`Stock, race
dong hinh`(tam ly) Dynamic stereotype
dong ho`Pay one's share in a tontine#family
dong hoc`Kinetics
dong kho lanh`Lyophylization
dong khung`to enframe, to circle, to enclose
dong kich`Act a part (in a play)#ut on an act
dong lan`(van chuong) East neighbourhood, orient neibourhood
dong loa`ccomplice; to be party to
dong mach`Artery
dong nghia`Synonymous
dong nghit`Compact
dong nhung`(tu cu) Commanding officer
dong nuoc`urrent of water
dong phim`Play a part in a film
dong quan`Garrison
dong rieng`Edible canna
dong tac`Act; action; work
dong tac gia`Coauthor
dong tam`Have one's heart stirred
dong ten`Jesuit
dong thuan`(sinh vat) Pure stock, pure blooded line
dong thue`o pay taxes
dong tien`Grotto of fairies#money, currency
dong tinh`Feel sexually aroused#Stir, commotion
dong tinh tu`Participle
dong to`Storm
dong tu`Verb#pupil
dong vai`Act the part of; act, do
dong vat`Animal
dong vat chi`Fauna
dong vat hoc`Zoology
dong vay`Crust over
dong vi`isotope,#isotopic
dong vi ngu`(ngon ngu) Apposittion
dong vien`To mobilize; to get ready for use
dong y`Oriental medicine#To agree; to concur; to assent
dong yen`Harness
dop`(khau ngu, it dung) Get thin, get flate#Bad luck; ill luck; misfortune#Pop, crack#n someone's face#Snap#Thud#to snatch; to seize; to catch; to bite
dop chat`Talk back in a tit-for-tat manner
dot`(dia phuong) Cigarette-holder#Ignorant; unlettered; dull-witted#Young shoot; sprout#to burn; to light (lamp, pipe) To fire; to kindle#to prick; to sting; to bite#(Bot) internode; (Anat) phalanx#to leak#hinh anh) abuses come from the chiefs#to sew; to stich#wave#xem noi dot
dot bien`Change suddenly, undergo a sudden mutation
dot chay`Set blazing, make burn up
dot dac`completely ignorant
dot khoi`Rise up unexpectedly, stage a surprise uprising
dot kich`to attack suddenly
dot nat`Dilapidated#Very dull-writted (noi khai quat), crass
dot ngot`Suddenly, unexpectedly, out of the blue
dot nhap`Break into suddenly
dot nhien`Suddenly
dot pha`Burn and destroy#Make a sudden attack on; make a sudden breach through (an encirclement)
dot pha khau`(quan su) Break-through
dot phat`Erupt, break out
dot song`Vertebra
dot tu`(cu) Sudden death
dot via`Burn a bamboo spill (a piece of paper) for driving ill luck away
dot xuat`to burst out of
du`(dia phuong) xem nhu#(tuc) Fuck, stuff#Lark, romp#Odd#Rheum (gum on the edge of the eyelids).#dia phuong) xem nhu#Stiff (cung noi du_du)#To death, extremely#enough; adequate; sufficient#swing#to swing ; to see-saw; to teeter#to assist; to take part; to attend#to copulate; to unite sexually, to fuck#to entice; to lure#to push briskly; to walk#umbrella; parachute; sunshade#hough; however; whether#very tired#wocked; fierce#ad; unlucky
du am`Echo
du an`Draft; project#to have enough to eat
du ba`(it dung) Rippling tail (of a wave); lingering tremor (of some upheaval)
du bao`Forecast
du bay`(the thao) Flying trapeze
du bi`(cu) Prepare#eserve, reservist#n probation
du canh`Practise nomadic farming
du chi`Plan to spend
du con`Hooligan; rough
du cu`Be a nomad, live a nomadic life
du da`(dia phuong) Having enough and to spare, comfortable#(khau ngu) Easily-infected skin
du da du do`xem du do (lay)
du da du don`xem du don
du dang`(cu, it dung) Remnants (of a political party organizationally destroyed)#vagrant
du dat`Comfortably off, having more than enough
du di`Fish owl
du dia chi`(cu) Geography book
du dieu`Of a man of the world, of a know-all#o perfection#Perfectious, forward (in knowledge)(noi ve tre em)
du dinh`to project; to plan; to design
du do`Languid, sluggish#to entice; to seduce
du doan`to predict; to forecast
du doi`Frightfully violent, formidable, fierce
du don`Frolic amorously#Du da du don (lay, y tang)#Violent (inclined to beat up pupils, prisoners...)
du du`Papaw, papaya, melon-tree#nhu du
du du tia`nhu thau dau 
du dua`to seving, to sway
du duong`Melodious; harmonious; sweet
du gia`plentiful
du ha`Leisure time, leisure
du hanh`to travel
du hoc`(cu) Study abroad
du hoc sinh`(cu) Student abroard
du khach`tourist; traveller
du khuyet`Alternate (My)
du kich`Guerilla
du kien`Anticipate, foresee, prepare beforehand#xpectation, calculation#lanned view (about some matter), planned settlement (of some question)#Data
du lam`(cu) Go sightsseeing
du lich`to travel; to tour
du lieu`(it dung) Data#(it dung) Make preparations for some probable occurence
du luan`public opinion
du luat`Draft law, draft bill
du mat`In full attendance
du mo`(thong tuc)#ark from excess of joy
du muc`Nomadic shepherd
du muu`(luat) Premeditation
du ngoan`to go sightseeing
du nhap`(it dung) Import (cultural habits...)
du phong`Provide for (some undesirable event), provice against
du rang`Though, although
du sao`Anyhow, anyway
du so`Complete, full
du tham`(cu) Hold an inquiry into (a legal case).#cu) Inquirer
du thao`Draft (a bill...)#raft bill, draft resolution..
du thi`to go up for an examination
du thinh`Attend (as an abserver, as a guest...)
du thu`Estimate as possible revenues
du thu du thuc`Lead a truant life, idle
du thua`Superfluous; redundant, in excess
du thuyen`yatch
du thuyet`(cu) Be an ambassabor at large, trying to persuade other coutries into some alliances
du tinh`Estimate beforehand
du toan`to calculate in advance
du ton`violent; ferocious
du tro`(thong tuc) Every means possible, every means fair foul
du tru`Put by, lay aside, reserve. have a reserve of#everve#to provide of
du ung luc`Prestressed
du xich`Vernier, sliding-scalt
du xuan`to enjoy the spring
dua`(used in front of nouns or absolutely to indicate a person of lowwer position or derogatively)#Coconut#Melon; salted vegetables#Pineapple, ananas#ineapple plants are grown widely in the country. People in southern#ietnam usually call this tropical fruit as Trai Thom (fragrant fruit) which is literally precise quote for the fruit because anyone who first takes a bite of the fruit can surely feel the strong sweet smell come to his or her nostrils. The good smell that lingers longer than that of some other fruits, makes connoisseurs find it hard to forget. Pineapple is processed for different products such as canned pineapple, pineapple liquor and sweet preserved pineapple. Growers press this fruit to get the juice which is then mixed with the yoke of a hen's egg before being stirred thoroughly to become a muddy drink. The drink is said to be very sweet, butterfly and nutritious#To compete, to emulate, to vie#o show, to display, to show off#Dua ghe ngo la tro choi tieu bieu phu hop vung dat lam song nhieu nuoc cua dong bao Khmer Nam bo. Ghe ngo duoc lam bang than mot cay go to, duc rong lam cho ngoi cho cac tay ddua. Co loai ghe ngo chua duoc 50 nguoi dua, dai toi 40 met. Dau ghe co hinh rong ran, hai ben la hinh trang tri nhieu mau sac.  Dua thuyen la mot sinh hoat truyen thong cua cu dan Viet co tu thoi cac vua Hung ma hinh anh con luu lai tren cac hinh trang tri o trong dong. Dua thuyen co tu Bac chi Nam trong cac le hoi dan gian.+Junk-race is a game suitable for the areas criss-crossed with rivers where the Khmer community of South-Vietnam lives. Each Ghe Ngo (Ngo junk) is made of an empty and big tree trunk in which the rowers take their seats. In some cases, such a junk can be 40 meters long and contain up to 0 rowers. Ngo junks are always decorated with multicoloured and impressive designs in front and on both sides. Boat-race belongs to traditional activities dated from the Kings Hung's dynasty, of which the stamp is still retained on the surface of the bronze drums. Boat-races are seen in most of popular festivals throughout Vietnam#chopstick#to conduct; to escort; to bring; to take; to pass; to give#to joke; to jest#to lean on; to stand against
dua be`a boy; a child
dua bep`nhu dua ca
dua bon`Play pranks, trifle
dua ca`Big flat chopstick (for serving out rice from the pot)
dua can`Periwinkle (cay)
dua cay`Wash down with alcohol
dua chan`See (somebody) off
dua chen`Vie hard
dua chuot`Cucumber
dua cot`to tease mischievously
dua da`Say with a smooth tongue
dua dai`Pandanus#Trifle; dally
dua dam`Depend on (ham y che)#cung noi dua ma Attend (someone's) funeral, follow the funeral procession (of someone)
dua dau`Escort the bride to the bridegroom's house
dua day`nhu dua da
dua do`(dia phuong) Water Melon
dua doi`to copy ; to imitate
dua don`to meet and see off
dua duong`to guide, to lead the way
dua gion`Play
dua gop`Vegetable pickles
dua hanh`Pickleed welsh onion
dua hau`watermelon
dua hong`Chinese melon
dua khuay`(hoa hoc) Stiring rod
dua le`Pear shaped (pyrifrom) melon
dua leo`ucumber
dua ma`nhu dua dam
dua mon`Vegetable pickles
dua muoi`Pickles and salt, poor foods
dua nghich`to play
dua ngua`Horse-race
dua ninh`to flatter; to adulate
dua nuoc`Nipa (cay)
dua o`(cu) Servant, house-servant
dua tay`Melon
dua thuyen`Regatta
dua tin`to inform, to publish news
dua tinh`to ogle; to make eyes (at)
dua tranh`Compete sharply
dua tren`o found on
duc`(dia phuong) Reprove#Virtue, righteousness#cu) (used in front of nouns to indicate high standing or holiness)#male; cock; buck; bull; he#to cast; to found to be alike#to chisel; to carve; to chase chisel#to rear; to bring up
duc anh duong`(cu) Creche
duc cha`(ton giao) Monsignor
duc do`Righteousness and generosity
duc duc`Elevating education, moral educaton
duc hanh`Righteousness and good charater
duc ket`to sum up, to summarize
duc khoet`Squeeze money from,squeeze
duc mat`(thong tuc) nhu duc
duc nang`(tam ly) Libido
duc ngau`Very muddy (noi ve nuoc)
duc ong`His Royal Highness, Monsignor
duc san`Prefabricated
duc tien`Mint, coin [into money]
duc tin`Creed
duc tinh`passion#quality; virtue
duc vong`lust; desire; passions
dui`Bamboo rat#Poke (snout...), grout#Tussore#blind; eyless#stick, awl awl#to prick#thigh#xem giui
dui cui`club; bludgeon
dui duc`Club-shaped mallet
dui mu`Blind
dui non`Young gilrs' thigh
dui tat`o stub out
dum`(dia phuong; khau ngu) Assemble in a group, huddle up#hub#to warp; to envelope#xem nhum
dum boc`Protect and help mutually
dum do`Wrinkled up
dum dup`nhu thum thup
dun`(dia phuong) nhu nhum#(it dung) Push from behind#Push out, push up (from below)#ass the buck, shift the responsibility (of some hard job)#heap; hill dune#to heat; to boil; to warm to push; to shove
dun day`Try to pass the buck to others
dun nau`Do the cooking
dun rui`o push; to bring about
dung`(dia phuong) nhu nhung#Bamboo framing (of a wattle and daub)#Boom, bang#Bravery; courage#Seat#Tolerate, be tolerant toward, leav unpunished#do not#just; exact; accurate; right; precise#to collide; to hit; to hurtle; to dash; to against#o touch#to contain; to hold; to have the capicity for#to employ; to use; to take#to erect; to raise; to set up; to put up#to offer; to proffer#Slack; idle#to stand; to set#to stop; to halt#to use; to employ
dung binh`(cu) Conduct an army, conduct a war
dung bong`Noon, midday (when the sun is at its zenith)
dung cam`Brave; courageous
dung cham`Bump against each other, rub against each other#arm, wound, touch
dung cong`Take pains (in carrying out research, in artistic creation)
dung cu`equiment; instrument
dung da dung dinh`xem dung dinh (lay)
dung dan`Serious, serious-minded#Sound, right, correct
dung dang`undecide; hesitant
dung dau`Be at the head of, head#Run into
dung day`nhu dung len
dung di`simple; easy
dung dich`solution
dung dinh`Fishtail-palm
dung do`Clash
dung doang`Boom and bang, boom and crack
dung dua`Sway lightly
dung dung`(hinh anh) to fabricate (story)#Boom away, bang away#oomingly#Indifferent
dung duong`Lounge at treet corners
dung gia`At a stabilized price
dung gio`Windless#precise time
dung han`In due course
dung hoa`to harmonize
dung khi`Courage, bravery
dung lai`o halt; to come to a halt
dung len`cung noi dung day Stand up, sit up, rise
dung luc`Timely, opportune
dung luong`Content, capacity
dung manh`Brave and strong
dung mao`Countenance, face
dung mo`to be stirred up
dung moi`(hoa hoc) Solven
dung muc`As it should be, reasonable#Moderate
dung nap`Accept, admit
dung nham`(dia chat) Lava
dung nhan`countenance
dung quang`(cu) Good looks, fair face
dung sai`(ky thuat) Tolerance
dung si`valiant man
dung tam`Intend, mean#ntention design
dung tha`Forgive, pardon
dung than`to take refuge
dung thu`to excuse; to pardon
dung tich`Capacity
dung tuc`Vulgar
dung tung`to wink at; to tolerate
dung tuoi`Midle-aged
dung tuong`Brave general (thoi xua)
dung vo`Give full scope to one's abilities
dung vung`to keep one's foothold
dung y`o intend to
dung yen`to keep still
duoc`Catch (fish) with some toxic substance#Mangrove (cay)#Medicine#the torch#to obtain; to get; to permision; to twin; to gain#able; possible
duoc dien`Pharmacopoeia
duoc hoa`(cu, van chuong) Lit candle in the bridal chamber
duoc hoc`pharmacy; pharmacentics
duoc khoa`Pharmacy
duoc lieu`Drug ; Medicine
duoc loi`Receive a promise; be given a promise
duoc long`Enjoy the trust of, be trusted by
duoc mua`Have a bumper crop
duoc nuoc`Give a flavoured beautifully coloured concoction (noi ve tra)
duoc pham`Pharmaceutical product
duoc phong`(cu) Chemist's shop, drugstore (My)
duoc quyen`o have a right
duoc si`pharmeacist; chermist
duoc ta`Phescription clerk
duoc thao`Medician plant, herb
duoc the`Follow up an advantage#esult
duoc tinh`Pharmaceutical value (of a materia medica)
duoc tue`Enlightenment of the Buddhist tenets
duoc viec`Efficient (in minor jobs), being a handy man#or convenience's sake, for the sake of having done with it, just to have
duoi`Under; below#streblus (cay)#tail; file; end#to dismiss; to discharge; to turm off; to cast cut ; to expel#to stretch; to extend#xem ca duoi#oing very badly, very weak# little short, not quite the right [weight]
duoi co`nhu duoi
duoi ga`Short-pig-tail (left hanging from a woman's sausage-shaped turban)
duoi hoi`Short of breath, short-winded
duoi kip`atch; to come up with
duoi mat`Canthus
duoi nheo`Co duoi nheo# pennon, a pennant
duoi sam`Pig-tail, queue (of hair)
duoi tau`Stern
duoi theo`to run after
duoi tom`ao duoi tom#wallow-tailed coat, swallow-tail
duoi uoi`orang-outang
duom`Catch fire easily, be easily set on fire#e pervaded with#e soaked with
duom da`nhu dam da nghia 1
duon`Mat duon ra#ear (have) a blank expression (a blank face)#Straight and at full length
duong`Husband of one's aunt#Paper mulbery#nhu dang Be in the process of#poplar#cean#possitive; male; solar#road; street; way; route#to nourish; to foster; to husband#to seem; to be just like
duong ban`positive photograph
duong bang`Runway
duong be`(cu) Portly
duong benh`Convalesce, be in convalescence
duong bien`(the thao) Touch-line#Sea route
duong binh`o convalesce; to be in convalescence
duong bo`by land; over land
duong cai`Highway
duong cai quan`(cu) cung noi duong quan Interprovincial highway, intercountry highway
duong cam`o entry; No admittance#piano
duong cay`Furrow
duong cheo`(toan) Diagonal
duong chim bay`As the crow flies
duong chuc`in charge, in office, in action
duong cuc`(ly') Anode#authorities
duong cung`Cul-de-sac, impasse
duong dai`Contemporary
duong dan`Trajectory
duong danh`(cu) Get oneself a good name
duong dat`Path-way, foot-path#istace
duong dau`to face; to confront
duong day`Line, network
duong di`Road, way
duong doi`path of life
duong duc`(cu, trang trong) Foster and educate; bring up
duong duong`Stately, having a stately brearing#climic; hospital
duong gian`Land pf the living, this world
duong huyen`(toan) Hypotenuse
duong khi`(cu) Oxygen
duong kim`Present
duong kinh`Granulated sugar#iameter
duong lao`Husband one's old-age strength
duong lao vien`(cu) Home for the aged
duong lich`Solar calendar
duong lieu`willow
duong loi`Road, way#ine
duong mai`nhu giang mai
duong mau`(cu) Adoptive mother
duong mon`Track, rut
duong nao`How much
duong ngoi`Parting
duong nhiem`In power
duong nhien`naturally, as a matter of course
duong nhu`As it would seem
duong nu`(cu) Adoptive daughter
duong pho`Street
duong phu`(cu) Adoptive father
duong quy`Ashweed
duong sa`Roads (noi khai quat)
duong sat`Railway
duong sinh`to rear; to nourish; to bring up
duong su`The person concerned
duong suc`Save one's health
duong tat`Short cut
duong thai`(y hoc) Embryotrophic
duong than`(cu) Preserve [the lucidity of] one's mind
duong thang`Caramel#Straight line
duong the`nhu duong gian
duong thi`In the prime of youth, in the prime of life
duong thoi`Current at that time
duong tinh`ale nature
duong tranh`Side-track
duong trap`(sinh hoc) Chyle
duong trieu`Current dynasty, current reign
duong tron`Circle. circle
duong truong`long road
duong vat`penis; viril number
duong ve`ay home
duong vong`Roundabout way. Di duong vong#o use roundabout ways (to achieve something)
duong xi`Fern
duong xoan oc`Spiral
duong xoi`groove
duong xuoi`Lowlands, delta areas
duot`to drill; to practise; to train
dup`Patch over again#cu) Graduate as junior bacherlor many times#razen faced#double
dut`to break; to give away ; to cut#to cease; to end; to come to a final stop#to insert; to pint (key in lock, etc.)
dut diem`Score (a goal)#inish at a given moment
dut duoi`(thong tuc) Plain as a pikestaff
dut gay`(dia ly) Fault
dut hoi`Out of breath, deal tired
dut khoat`to settle out of hand
dut lot`to bribe; to buy over
dut mua`o shelter from the rain
dut nut`Cork, stop with a cork#ug away
dut quang`Interruptedly
dut ruot`Feel deeply pained
dut tay`o cut one's finger 
dut tinh`o break off
dut tui`Appropriate, pocket dishonestly (public money)#ense, dull#dia phuong) Take shelter, shelter (from rain...)
duy`save that; except that
duy cam`Sensual, sensualistic, sensationlist
duy danh`Nominalist, nominalistic
duy linh`Spiritualist, spiritualistic
duy nga`Egotistic, egotistical
duy nhat`Unique.#it dung) One and undivided
duy nhut`nly; sole; unique
duy tam`Idealist, idealistic#uperstitious
duy tam luan`(cu) Idealism
duy tan`o reform#oderniste
duy tri`Intellectualist#to maintain
duy vat`Materialism
duy vat luan`(cu) Materialism
duy y chi`Voluntarist
duyen`charm; grace
duyen co`reason; case
duyen dang`Graceful, charming
duyen do`(cu; it dung) Cause
duyen giang`(it dung) Riparian
duyen hai`coast; seashore; sea-coast
duyen kiep`predestined affinity
duyen no`Predestined love tie.#van chuong) Natural association with
duyen phan`Fate in love, fate in marriage
duyen so`Long-sealed fate
duyet`to examine; to inspect; to review
duyet binh`to review troops
duyet y`to approve after consideration
e`(thuc) (tieng dia phuong) nhu hung doi (xem hung)#Come along!#do not sell; not saleable#to be numb#shamed#to fear; to be afraid
e a`to drawl out, to hum and haw#to read loudly and unceasingly
e am`Unable to find customers; unmarketable#feel a dull and lasting pain
e che`Shameful; ashamed#shameful
e chong`danh cho dan ba) to be on the shelf
e co`Back-bending
e de`to fear; be shy of
e e`xem e (lay)
e he`abudant; profuse
e le`coy; shy; bashful
e mat`Feel ashamed, feel awkward with ashame
e ngai`to be shy of, to flinch
e rang`afraid that#to feel one's teeth on edge
e so`Apprehend
e then`Shy and different
ec`Squeal
ech`frog
ech nhai`amphibians
em`smooth; sweet; soft; calm#to bewitch; to exorcize#to hush up; to cover up#younger brother; younger sister#, me#small; smaller
em a`quict, peaceful
em ai`melodious; sweet; mild
em am`united; harmonious; tranquil
em ang`Silent, quiet, noiseless
em be`Baby
em chong`brother-in-law; sister-in-law
em dau`sister-in-law
em dem`screne; fond; pleasant
em diu`sweet, gentle, smooth
em em`A little smaller#xem em (lay)
em gai`younger sister
em ho`cousin
em nhem`to hush up; to smother up
em nuoi`Younger adoptive brother (sister)
em re`Brother-in-law (one's younger sister's husband)
em ru`Very mild, very soft#mooth-sailing, plain-sailing
em tai`pleasant to the ears; sweet; melodious
em tham`peaceful; amicable
em ut`Youngest sibling, youngest sister, youngest brother#reenhorn
em vo`Brother-in-law, sister-in-law (one's wife's younger sibling)
en`swallow; swift
eng ec`xem ec (lay)
enh`Dull (yellow)#Swell (noi ve bung)#dua) Be big with child#to stick out; to swell#o lie at full length#to swell
enh bung`xem enh
enh enh`xem enh (lay)
enh uong`bull-frog
eo`to twist, to bend#waist
eo a eo et`xem eo et (lay)
eo bien`strait; channel
eo dat`Isthmus
eo eo`Scold loudy and peristingly#nhu eo eo#shrill
eo et`Groan (noi ve don ganh khi ganh nang)#groan
eo hep`scanty; want; tight
eo la`weakly; puny
eo le`(hinh anh) tricky; troublesome
eo lung`aist
eo oc`Night-time cock crowing, night-time cock crowing, night-time cock-a-doodle-doo
eo oi`Faugh!
eo ot`(cung noi eo uot) Weakly [from poor health]#In an affected voice (different from one's usual voice)
eo seo`Harp on scold#aise a din
eo uot`sickly
ep`to deflate, to flatten#to force; to conpel
ep buoc`to constrain; to oblige
ep duyen`to conpel a girl to marry someone
ep lieu nai hoa`o commit a rape on a woman
ep long`o constrain oneself
ep nai`to insist
ep uong`to force, to compel
ep xac`(khau ngu) Mortify oneself
eu`(thong tuc) Bloody bad#augh! phew!
eu eu`xem eu (lay)
eu oi`(thong tuc) Faugh! phew!
ga`gas; accelerator#hap; bloke#o coax; to cajole; to fawn on#o give in marriage; to marry one's daughter#o pawn; to pledge#ock; fowl; chicken#o give advice on; to help
ga choi`ighting-cock; game-cock
ga dong`rog
ga gam`o make approaches to (a woman); to make a pass at
ga gio`ockerel
ga loi`heasant
ga mai`en
ga mai ghe`ullet
ga mo`im#ull-witted
ga ra`arage
ga rung`ock of the wood; jungle fowl
ga tay`urkey
ga thien`apon
ga to`cake, gateau
ga trong`ock
gac`Space under (a bed, car, bridge..)#ntlers#rotch#o cross out#o put; to set on#o keep; to guard#o forget about; to pigeon-hole
gac bo`o put away, to give up
gac chuong`ell-tower; churchtower; steeple
gac dan`atchman, guardian
gac lung`ezzanine
gac xep`arret, annic
gach`rick#o rule; to make line#o cross out; to strike off#o delete
gach dit`o underline; to underscore
gach noi`yphen
gach ong`ollow brick
gai`(Bot) flax#to offend; to shock#irl#o bolt; to fasten#o scratch
gai bay`o lay a smare; to set a trap
gai cua`o bolt a door
gai diem`rostitute; whore; courtesan
gai giang ho`emi-mondaine
gai goa`idow
gai goc`Difficulty, obstacle, hurdle#thorny; prichly#hinh anh) difficulties
gai mat`unsightly
gai nganh`Obstinate and quarrelsome
gai nhay`My) taxi-dancer ; dancing girl
gai oc`goose-flesh
gai sot`Begin to feel feverish
gai to`oung girl; girl under age
gain`o shorten#o record
gam`Gramme#amut, scale#brocade; embroidered silk#hang the head (out of shame); wear sullen looks#nhu gam#to gnaw; to nibble#to pin; to fasten with a pin#to ponder#to roar#space under
gam gam`xem gam
gam ghe`(tieng dia phuong) aim at, have designs on#to square up to, to have one's hackles up
gam ghi`Green imperial pigeon
gam gu`Snort (of dogs about to fight).#thong tuc) have one's hackles up
gam mon`Corrode
gam nham`rodent
gam thet`to bawl
gam troi`the canopy of the heavens, world
gam voc`brocade and glossy flowered satin, silk and satin
gan`Muffled#liver#brave; daring; courageous#near; next to#early; about#nerve; vein; sinew#o foist#o hinder; to impede#to glue; to fasten; to stick
gan ban chan`ole of the foot
gan ben`Neighbouring, adjcent
gan bo`to become fond of
gan can`o decant
gan co`Stiff-necledly without admitting one's mistake
gan cot`tendons and bones
gan da`brave, dauntless
gan day`nearby
gan den`At the approach of
gan gan`Near, close by
gan goc`fearless, intrepid
gan gui`keep in close touch with the masses#lose by; close to (someone)
gan guoc`Rugged
gan hoi`o press with questions
gan ke`Close at hand
gan li`intrepidly calm
gan lien`nhu gan li#to connect closely, to go with, to be related to
gan nhu`Nearly, almost
gan xa`far and near, everywhere
gan xi`Seal
gang`(cung noi gang hoi) Question closely (until one gets an answer...)#cast iron; pig-iron span#hinh anh) short preriod time#glove; boxing gloves#tant; tense#to endeavour; to strive
gang cong`Do one's llevel best
gang go`nhu gang
gang goi`nhu gang
gang guong`Make an unusual effort
gang hoi`nhu gang 
gang suc`to make every effort
gang tac`Very short distance
gang tay`Span#b) Short distance#xem gang
gang thep`Iron, ironlike
ganh`Vie, compete#o shoulder; to bear a charge#o carry#oad
ganh dua`to rival; to vie; to compete
ganh ghet`o envy; to jealous
ganh go`Compete with a bad intention
ganh hat`roupe; theatre company
ganh ti`Envy
gao`aw rice; rice#Bot) bombax#o slave; to grind#ipper#o cry out, to shout
gao nep`glutinous rice; sticky rice
gao te`Ordinary rice (as opposite to sticky rice)
gao thet`o scream
gap`nhu gap#to fold; to close; to shut#pressing; urgent; hurry#to meet; to see; to find; to encounter#to pick up with chopsticks
gap boi`multifold, manyfold
gap dip`Meet with a favourable opportunity
gap doi`double; duplicative
gap ga gap ghenh`xem gap ghenh (lay)
gap gap`Pressing, urgent (noi khai quat)
gap ghenh`rough ; rocky ; bumpy
gap go`to meet with
gap khuc`broken ; zigzag
gap mat`to meet, to see
gap may`to be lucky; in luck's way
gap nan`o be in danger
gap ngay`Nearing the dead-line
gap nhau`o meet
gap phai`Meet with (difficulties, bad luck...)
gap tham`Draw lots, cast lots
gap thoi`(cung noi gap van) Meet with good fortune
gat`to dupe; to beguile; to cheat; to take in#to nod#to reap; to harvest; to cut#to scold; to chide#hard; severe; violent; intense
gat bo`Ignore, refuse to consider#liminate
gat dau`Nod
gat ga gat gu`xem gat gu (lay)
gat ga gat guong`xem gat guong (lay)
gat gam`Swindle, cheat (noi khai quat)
gat gao`Strict, severe, harsh
gat gong`churlish; grouchy; bad-tempered
gat gu`Nod repeatedly out of satisfaction
gat hai`nhu gat (noi khai quat)
gat le`to dry one's tears
gat mu`Burst noisily and loudly into angry words
gat no`to give security for a debt
gat tan`Ashtray
gau`Dandruff, scurf#Idle, aimless#ail; bucket; bailer#curf; dandruff#bear#hem; turn-up
gau cho`Malayan bear
gau gau`Bow-wow
gau meo`panda
gau ngua`ibetan bear
gau rong`ucket with a long handle
gay`(it dung) call forth (someone's ideas, confidences)#ape; scauff of the neck#o crom; to coo; to chirp#o break; to snap; to break off#stick; cane; staff#thin; spare; gaunt#to quarrel#to excite; to cause; to create
gay can`horny; ticklish
gay chien`Provoke (stir up) war, be warlike, be a warmonger
gay chuyen`(cung noi gay su) Be quarrelsome, pick a quarrel (with somebody)
gay com`slim
gay dan`o twang
gay det`scraggy
gay do`o collapse; to fall in
gay dung`to found, to establish
gay gat`lazing hot,#eated,#evere, sharp, critical
gay gay`(thuong gay gay sot) Feel feverish
gay go`Be quarrelsome, be fond of picking a quarrel#een; severe; tense#thin
gay goc`Sticks and canes
gay guoc`raw-boned, bony
gay han`provoke war, provoke hostilities
gay lon`Pick up a quarrel, start an argument
gay me`Anaesthetize
gay mon`Be wasting, lose fesh by degrees
gay nhieu`(radio) Jam (a transmission)
gay nhom`Thin as lath
gay no`o run into debt
gay roi`Pertuebative
gay sach`ack of a book
gay sot`Feel feverish
gay su`to pick a guarrel
gay tay`Quarterstaff
gay thu`o create enemies
gay yeu`sickly
gen`(sinh hoc) Gene
ghe`(y hoc) itch; scabies#boat; junk#chair; seat#to stir; to steam#sentinel-crab. at someone's expense#to have a horror; horribly; terribly#to hit; to strike#small jaw#to look in; to drop in
ghe banh`aronchair
ghe bo`(tieng dia phuong) Camp-bed, canvas bed
ghe chai`Fishing junk
ghe chao`Rocking-chair
ghe dai`bench
ghe dau`stool
ghe dien`electric chair
ghe dua`Chair
ghe ghe`xem ghe (lay)
ghe gom`(cung noi ghe hon) Frightful, horrible#ormidable, terrible
ghe hon`nhu ghe gom
ghe lanh`indifferent; frigid
ghe lo`ghe choc
ghe lung`cung noi nga lung lie down for a short while
ghe mat`Glue one's eyes to
ghe ngua`Plank bed (made of two or three boards)
ghe nguoi`Repugnant, abhorent
ghe rang`Set the teeth on edge
ghe ron`Shudder with horror
ghe tai`Put one's mouth close to someone's ears and whisper something
ghe tom`hideous; disgusting
ghe tua`nhu ghe dua 
ghe vai`Shoulder one's share of responsibility for
ghe xich du`nhu ghe chao 
ghech`to lean on; to rest on
ghem`Raw vegetables
ghen`(tieng dia phuong) Rheum (gum on the edge of the eyelids)#jealous; envious
ghen an`Be jealous of someone's greater advantages
ghen ghet`to envy; to begrudge
ghen nguoc`Be nonsensically jealous (noi ve vo le ghen vo ca)
ghen ti`Envy
ghen tuc`Be jaundiced
ghen tuong`Be jealous (in love)
ghen ty`o envy ; to be envious
ghenh`Crane#fall; waterfall; whirlpool
gheo`to tease
ghep`to couple; to connect; to join
ghep mong`Morties
ghet`Gaiters#to detest; to hate; to dislike; to abominate#dirt; filth
ghet bo`Disgrace
ghet mat`Cut dead (out of dislike)
ghi`to note; to record; to put down#switch#to tighten; to hold tight
ghi am`to record
ghi chep`to write down, to take
ghi chu`Supply footnotes to
ghi cong`Cite
ghi long`Engrave on one's heart
ghi nhan`Acknowledge
ghi nhap`o acknowledge
ghi nho`to engrave; to impress deeply
ghi tac`Engrave deeply on one's memory
ghi ten`Enter one's name on a list
ghi y`(ngon ngu hoc) Ideographic
ghien`to be addicted to
ghim`pin#to pin; to enclose; to fasten#to pull
gi`(tieng dia phuong) Undyed mark (in the cornner of a scarf...)#ress#rusty,#rust#what#hatever
gi dong`Verdigris, patina
gia`bean sprouts#price; cost#false; artificial; forged#to pretend; to feign#measure weighing about thirty kilograms of grain#old; aged; senile#to grind; to bray; to crush#to neutralize#to increase; to ad
gia an`nhu gia on 
gia ban`Selling price
gia ban buon`Wholesale price
gia ban le`Retail price
gia bao`Heirloom (some valuable thing like a jewel, weapon...)
gia bien`Family mishap, family misfortune
gia bieu`Tariff
gia bo`to pretend; to affect; to sham
gia boc`(tu cu; nghia cu) House servant
gia bua`An gia bua#at with good appetite following a sickness
gia buot`iting cold
gia ca`Venerably old, elderly#the prices
gia cac`Old and shrivelled up
gia cach`nhu gia bo
gia cam`Domestic fowls, poultry
gia cang`nhu gia cac
gia canh`family condition; situation of the family
gia cay`False dog-meat dish (prepare with pork)#idgin
gia chinh`(cung noi gia chanh) Household affairs, household chores; domestic arts
gia cho den`lack market price
gia chu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Master of the house, hhead of the ffamily
gia co`Consolidate, reinfotce, strengthen
gia coi`Old and stunted fruit-tree
gia cong`to endeavour; to do one's utmost; to process
gia cu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Abode
gia cuong`(it dung) nhu gia co
gia da`Imitation leather
gia dan`killed; experienced
gia dang`Disguise oneself as, wear a disguise#retend
gia danh`to pose as; to call oneself
gia dao`family ethics, family way of life
gia dao duc`Hypocritical
gia di`Moreover
gia dinh`family; househole#to suppose, to assume,#supposed ; subjunctive
gia dinh tri`Nepotism
gia do`nhu gia bo
gia doc`o neutralize the effects of poison
gia doi`For many years of one's life, for one's whole life#false; deceitful
gia dong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Page, housebay (in his early teens)
gia du`If#suppose [that]
gia dung`For family ues
gia giam`Adjust (by adding or substracting)
gia gian`mature; solid#ncisive, trenchant
gia giang`(tu cu; nghia cu) Cangue, cang
gia giao`Family education, family breeding
gia hieu`False, sham imitation
gia hinh`nhu gia dang
gia hong`nhu gia mom
gia huan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Family education
gia huong`Native place, native land
gia khom`Old and decrepit
gia khu`nhu gia khom
gia lam`pagoda
gia lang`Village patriarch
gia lao`Advanced in years, stricken in years
gia ma`nhu gia (nghia manh hon)
gia mao`to falsify; to forge; to fake
gia mom`(cung noi gia hong) Verbosely argumentative 
gia mua`Purchase price
gia ngo`Turn a blind eye to
gia nhap`to adhere; to accede
gia nhu`nhu gia su#nhu gia su
gia no`(tu cu; nghia cu) House servant (under the Ly, Tran, Ho dynasties)
gia nua`Old, aged
gia on`(tu cu; nghia cu, trtr) Express one's gratitude#Grant favours
gia pha`family annals (records)
gia phap`(tu cu; nghia cu) family customs and habits
gia phong`Supposing, if
gia quyen`[Menbers of the same] family
gia san`property, estate
gia som`Old and decrepit
gia su`(tu cu; nghia cu) Family event, family matter#Tutor, family preceptor#nhu gia su#to suppose ; supposing
gia suc`domestic fowl, cattle,..
gia tai`patrimony; legacy
gia tam`(tu cu; nghia cu) apply oneself to
gia tang`nhu gia bo#to increase
gia tao`Affected
gia tay`A little in excess#e firm (with somebody)
gia thac`(tu cu; nghia cu) make invented excuses for
gia than`(tu cu; nghia cu) mandarin's household butler (manager)
gia thanh`Cost price
gia that`Thanh gia that#o get married
gia the`Con nha gia the# child of an influential family
gia thi truong`arket price; market rate
gia thiet`Suppose#upposition
gia thu`Giay gia thu#arriage lines, marriage certificate#nhu gia su#nhu gia thu
gia thuyet`supposition; hyppothesis
gia tien`Family ancestors, family forbears
gia to`(ngon ngu hoc) Affix
gia toc`Family#acceleration
gia tra`Deceptive, false
gia trang`Disguise oneself as
gia treo co`Gallows, gibbet
gia tri`Value worth
gia truyen`handed down from ancestors
gia tu`(tu cu; nghia cu) My mother, our mother#Family private property#to take leave of
gia ve`Easel
gia vi`spice
gia vo`Pretend, fein
gia yeu`Decrepit, old and feeble
giac`pirate; invader#sleep ; slumber#to cup#horn#ngle
giac bien`pirate
giac cuop`thugs, robbers
giac diep`(tu cu; nghia cu) Sound sleep; beautiful dream
giac do`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu goc do
giac gia`war; hostilities
giac hoa`(van chuong, tu cu; nghia cu) Sleep (of a beautiful girl)
giac hoe`(van chuong, tu cu; nghia cu) Beautiful dream
giac mac`cornea
giac mo`dream
giac mong`(cung noi giac mo) Dream
giac ngo`to rouse; to come to reason; to grow alive
giac ngu`sleep
giac nong`Sound sleep, sleep of the just
giac nut`(sinh hoc) Sucker
giac quan`sence; sense-organ
giac thu`diplomatic memorandum
giac tien`(tu cu; nghia cu) Beautiful woman's sleep
giac xuan`Beautiful woman's sweet sleep.#huy Van sudden woke from her sweet sleep
giai`(van chuong, tu cu; nghia cu) Open (one's heart); make known#one's feeling)#Bamboo screen (in a verandaaaah)#award; prize#to deliver, to conduct under escort#to solve; to answer (Math)#nhu trai
giai ach`Deliver from misfortune
giai am`(tu cu; nghia cu) Good news#good news
giai bay`to make know one's feelongs
giai binh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Breakup the troops
giai buon`Relieve one's melancholy, relieve the tedium
giai cap`class; grade
giai cau`Giai cau tuong phung#eet unexpectedly
giai cuu`to save; to rescuse; to deliver
giai dap`Clear up (someone's) queries, answer (someone's) questions
giai dieu`Melody
giai doan`stage; phase; period
giai doc`Detoxicate
giai gai`nhu trai gai
giai giap`lay down one's arms
giai gie`pour out confidences, open one's heart
giai hoa`Mediate a peace (between two parties), act a peace-marker
giai khat`to have a drink; to have refreshment. ort, to solace
giai khuay`o comfort, to solace
giai lam phat`(kte) Deflation
giai lao`have a break, take a rest, take a breathing space
giai ma`Decode
giai muon`nhu giai phien
giai nghe`Retire, leave one's profession
giai nghia`to explain; to elucidate; to interpret
giai ngu`Be demobilized, be discharged [honourably] from the army
giai nguyen`(cung noi thu khoa) First llaureate at interprovincial competition-examination
giai nhan`beautiful girl; exquisite woman
giai nhiem`free (somebody) from his (her) functions
giai nhiet`antipyretic, heat-relieving
giai oan`Clear (somebody) of a false charge
giai pham`Fine work of art
giai phap`solution
giai phau`Dissect, operate#urgery#to operate; to dissect
giai phien`Relieve one's sorrow
giai phong`to liberate; to free; to emancipate
giai phong quan`Liberation army (communist)
giai quyet`to solve; to resolve; to settle; to disentangle
giai sau`nhu giai phien
giai tan`to disperse; to break up; to dismiss
giai tang`Social section, social segment, social stratum
giai the`to disintegrate, to disband
giai thich`to explain, to clarify
giai thoai`Anecdote, ana
giai thoat`Free, release (from bonds)
giai thuong`Prize, award
giai tich`Analytics analysis
giai to`nhu giai bay
giai toa`to release; to raise the blockade
giai tri`to relax; to amuse oneself
giai tru`Ban, give up the use of
giai vay`Raise a siege, raise the encirclement#elp out of danger, put out of harm's way
giai vi`Delicacy, relish
giam`Flat bit#Strengthen will flat bits of bamboo#nhu giam coi#nhu giam ken#Splinter#Tread on, trample upon#paddle#to confine; to imprison; to detain#to crush; to trample; to stamp (on)#to lessen; to reduce; to decrease#to make up; to make good#to raise#to sound out#to stamp#vinegar#xem giam sinh
giam bao`Shavings (of wood)
giam bien`Linesman (bong da)
giam binh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Commanding officer of a provincial garrison (thoi
giam bong`Ham
giam bot`Diminish, reduce
giam cam`Keep in a prison cell, place in confinement
giam chan`(cai giam chan) Damper#Stamp one's foot
giam cuu`keep in custody for interrogation
giam dap`Trample upon
giam dinh`to appraise; to estimate; to examine and to decide
giam dinh vien`Expert
giam doa`Menace, intimade
giam doc`director; manager; supervisor
giam ghem`Dish of boiled pork and raw vegetables dipped in vinegar#rugal repast
giam gia giam gian`xem giam gian (lay)
giam giat`(thong tuc) Be aroused#tuc ngu) With Stomamach full and back Wrm, evveryonne feels arounsed
giam giu`Detain, keep in prison
giam giui`Sly (something, into someone's hands)#o (something) stealthily
giam ham`Keep under constraint,#onfine
giam hieu`School managing board
giam ho`Guardian#uor of a monor
giam ken`Tongue (of a clarinet)
giam khao`examiner
giam long`Keep under vurvveillannce, put under house arrest
giam ma`Equerry
giam mat`Molasses vinegar
giam muc`bishop
giam nguc`jailer, warder
giam nhe`to cut down, to lighten
giam nhiem`(sinh hoc) Reducing
giam quoc`(tu cu; nghia cu) President (of a bourgeois republic)
giam sat`to supervise, to oversee
giam sinh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Student of the State College
giam sut`to decrease, to decline
giam thi`proctor; superintendent
giam thieu`Diminish; minimize
giam tho`Shorten one's life-span, bring someone's death nearer, take year out of someone's life
giam thue`o reduce taxes
giam toc`Reduce speed;slow down
giam toi`to mitigate a penalty
gian`apartment, compartment; room#tricky; dishonest; disloyal#cockroach; black beetle#frame; frame-work#to be angry#to put down heavily#to slacken; to relax; to stretch
gian ac`Dishonest and cruel
gian cach`(it dung) Intermittent
gian chinh`Streamline a staff by reducing it
gian dam`adulterous
gian di`asy; simple; plain
gian diep`spy; espionage
gian do`(tu cu; nghia cu) Scheme, diagram
gian doan`Interrupted, discontinueed
gian doi`Be in te sulks, be sulky#deceitful; false
gian don`Simple, uncomplicated
gian don hoa`Simplify
gian du`angry, furious,#to anger, to be envaged
gian giao`Scaffold, scaffolding#shifty, designing
gian giat`(lay) To quiver
gian giua`Overflow profusely
gian hang`stand; stall; pavilion
gian hiem`Perfidious, dishonest and wicked
gian hoa`(cung noi gian thieu) Pyre
gian hoac`Perhaps, maybe (My)
gian hung`Machiavellian
gian kho`Arduous. hardship
gian lan`Cheating
gian lao`Gruelling hard
gian lau`(tu cu; nghia cu) Plain and homely, homespun#fraudulently clandestine
gian luoc`summary; concise
gian nan`Miserably hard
gian than`Dishonest mandarin, dishonest courtier#Gian than tui phan#iscontented with one's lot
gian thu`(Thue gian thu) Indirect taxes 
gian tien`easy; simple and practical
gian tiep`indirect
gian uoc`(toan) Reduce
gian vat`to nag at, to torment
gian xao`artful; crafty; designing
gian xuong`feel rested (as from stretching one's legs or lying down...)
gian yeu`Summary but complete
giang`Spread#river#to explain; to expound; to teach; to lecture#to lower, to descend#to pull#to spin#o spread; to extend; to stretch
giang bien`Riverside
giang cap`Reduce to a lower rank (grade), demote
giang chi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Issue a decree, issue an ordinance (noi ve vua
giang chuc`Demote, reduce to a lower position
giang co`to pull about
giang dan`Tribune
giang day`Teach
giang duong`auditorium; lecture-room
giang giai`to explain, to make clear
giang ha`(tu cu; nghia cu) Descend, come down (from heaven)#Rivers and streams (noi khai quat)
giang hang`Straddle
giang ho`errant
giang hoa`Make peace; negotiate a ceasefire#Visit calamities on
giang khe`(tu cu; nghia cu) Rivers and brooks (streams)
giang luoi`o spread a net
giang mai`(y hoc) syphilis
giang nghia`Explain, make clear the meaning of (a word, sentence, literary excerpts)
giang pham`(tu cu; nghia cu) Descend on earth (noi' ve than tien)
giang sinh`to be born; to incarnate
giang son`Land, country
giang su`professor
giang tan`(tu cu; nghia cu) River watering place
giang the`nhu giang pham
giang thuat`(tu cu; nghia cu) Present and explain
giang tran`nhu giang pham
giang trat`Reduce to the next lower rank (grade)
giang vien`University lecturer#eacher
giang xe`Snatch and tear (something); get at someone's throat
gianh`Prick up (one's ears)#nhu tranh #to dispute ; to recure
gianh giat`Scramble for ; dispute
giao`(nhu trao) Brim over#lance; spear#to teach; to educate#to entrust; to assign#to deliver; to hand over#to hang (a criminal)
giao an`syllabus
giao ban`Hand over to the next shift
giao binh`Class [for two armies]
giao bong`(the) Serve
giao cam`(Than kinh giao cam) Sympathetic nerve
giao canh`Traffic police
giao cau`to copulate; to couple; to have sexual intercourse
giao chien`to exchange fire
giao chu`Head of a religion
giao chuc`(tu cu; nghia cu) Teacher
giao cu`teaching aids
giao dan`catholic
giao dau`Compete (in sport)#to prelude, to prologize
giao dich`to trade; to exchange; to deal
giao dieu`dogma
giao do`Follower (of a religion), believer
giao du`Entertain friendly relations with, be firends with
giao duc`education; bringing up
giao duc hoc`Pedagogics, pedagogy
giao duong`church; palace of worship
giao gio`(tieng dia phuong) nhu trao tro
giao gioi`Teaching circles
giao hao`Be on friendly terms
giao hen`Promise conditionally to (do something)
giao hieu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Exchange visitors, exchange helper (in organizing processions, festivals, etc.) between villages
giao hoa`Instil knowledge to and shape the feelings of#tu cu ; nghia cu) Civillize
giao hoan`Exchange, interchange#Commute#Return, give back
giao hoang`Pope
giao hoat`Friendishly cunning
giao hoc`(tu cu; nghia cu) Primary school teacher
giao hoi`(it dung) tu hoi#Congregation#hurch
giao hop`o have sexual intercourse
giao huan`(tu cu; nghia cu, trtr) Teach, give teachings to
giao huong`symphony
giao huu`Co-religionist, fellow-believer#friendship; amicable relations
giao keo`Contract
giao ket`(it dung) nhu ket giao
giao khoa`subject of study
giao long`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu thuong luong
giao luong`Deliver cereals to state barns
giao luu`Exchange rellations (trade, cultural...)
giao mac`Cold steel (weapons in former times)
giao nop`Deliver
giao phai`religious sect
giao pho`o entrust; to confide; to commit
giao phoi`(sinh hoc) Copulate.#sinh hoc) Cross
giao quyet`artful; deceitful
giao si`missionary
giao sinh`student-teacher
giao su`professor
giao tai`Teaching documents
giao te`Entertain foreign guests
giao thiep`to have relations with; to be in contact
giao thoa`Interfere
giao thoi`transition ; transitional
giao thong`to communicate
giao thong hao`communication trench
giao thu`(tu cu; nghia cu) District education officer (thoi phong kien va
giao thua`watch-night time
giao tiep`Be in touch with, be in contact with
giao tranh`nhu giao chien
giao trinh`Textbook forming a course (on some subject taucht at university)
giao tu`(sinh hoc) Gamete#gree multually (to do something)
giao tuyen`Line of intersection
giao vien`primary school teacher
giao vu`Teaching and study managing department
giap`Bruised (fuit)#cycle of twelve years#near; bordering; adjacent
giap bang`(tu cu; nghia cu) Graduate of a state competition-examination
giap binh`Armour-clad solider
giap chien`face each other in fighting, be line up in battle-array in front of each other
giap cong`Be locked in battle
giap gioi`Share the same border, border
giap gion`(nhu Chap chon) Flicker
giap hat`Between-crop period
giap la ca`hand-to-hand
giap mat`Soundly (beat, thrash)#ard#face to face
giap ranh`Limitroph, neighbouring, bordering
giap si`(tu cu; nghia cu) Armour-clad soldiers.#tu cu; nghia cu) Troops, soldiery (noi khai quat)
giap tran`nhu giap chien
giap trang`(Tuyen giap trang) (tu cu; nghia cu) thyroid gland
giap vu`Pre-harvest [period]
giap xac`(ddo^.ng) Crustacean
giat`Bed-plank (made of naeeow bamboo or wood laths put close to each other)#Wash aside#ass to one side#to snatch, to win to shock, to give a shock, to pull#to stick#to wash
giat gan`sensational
giat gia`Wash (noi khai quat)
giat giu`nhu giat gia 
giat giuong`nhu giat
giat la`Wash and iron, wash and press
giat lo`Grate
giat lua`(cung noi giat nong) Borrow in an emergency (and pay back immediately)
giat lui`to move back
giat minh`Statr#em co
giat nong`nhu giat lua
giat thot`Startle
giat xoi`nhu giat tam
giau`(tieng dia phuong) (nhu trau) Betel#Pout#fence; hedge#rich; wealthy#to hide; to conceal; to dissimulate
giau co`Rich, wealthy
giau gia`Baccaurea (cay)
giau gia xoan`Hog plum
giau giem`Hide, conceal (noi khai quat)
giau minh`Hide oneself
giau sang`High and rich
giau su`Very rich, very wealthy
giau ten`Incognito
giau tieng`Conceal one's hand
giay`Weed (a plot of ground), clean#evel#ribe with money, buy over#paper#second; moment#shoe#to trample, to tread under food#to strive; to struggle
giay anh`Photographic paper
giay bac`bank-note;hankbill
giay ban`Tissue paper (made from bark of a thymelacaceous plant)
giay bao`Newsprint
giay bao goi`Brown paper
giay bien lai`eceipt
giay boi`Coarse paper#Pasteboard, cardboard
giay bot`Boot
giay buom`Confetti
giay cao co`Half-boot
giay chet`to convulse just before death
giay chung chi`certificate
giay chung minh`Indentity card
giay chung nhan`Certificate
giay coi`Papyrus [paper]
giay da`Parchment
giay da be`Vellum
giay danh may`Flimsy paper, typing paper
giay dau`oil-paper
giay dep`Foot-wear
giay di duong`Travel document (with dates of departure and arrival as a certificate for travelling expenses...)
giay gia thu`Marriage certificate
giay giua`nhu giay
giay giuong`Get involved in (some trouble)
giay hoa tien`Flowered letter paper
giay in`rinting-paper 
giay ke o`checquered paper
giay khai sanh`irth-certificate
giay khai sinh`Birth certificate
giay khai tu`eath-certificate
giay khen`Commendation
giay kinh`nhu giay bong
giay lat`Moment, jiffy
giay loc`Filter-paper
giay lon`Waste paper
giay ma`paper; documents
giay moi`Inferior tissue paper#Invitation
giay nay`Explode with discontent
giay nen`nhu giay sap
giay nhap`Drafting paper
giay ong`Boot
giay phep`permit; license
giay phut`nhu giay lat
giay quy`(hoa hoc) Litmus paper
giay quyen`Thin tissue paper
giay rap`Emery-paper, glass-paper
giay sap`Stensil
giay tau bach`China paper
giay tham`nhu giay tham
giay than`carbon paper
giay thiec`Tin foil
giay thong hanh`passport
giay tin chi`Stamped paper
giay to`Paper, documents
giay trang kim`Spangle
giay ve sinh`toilet-paper
giay viet thu`Letter paper
giay vo`to torment; to worry
giay xeo`Trample upon
gie`Rice-ear#rag; cloth; clout
gie cui`Green magpie; blue magpie (chim)
gie lau`Clout
gie rach`Rag
giec`xem ca giec
giem`to disparage; to vilify
giem giep`xem giep (lay)
giem pha`xem giem
gien`(tu cu; nghia cu) xem gen#amaranth
gieng`Main rope (of a fishing-net)#the first month of the lunar year#well
gieng hai`First and second lunar months, a few months of the new year
gieng khoi`(cung noi gieng thoi) Deep well
gieng moi`nhu moi gieng
gieng thoi`xem gieng khoi
gieo`oblique#to sow; to spread
gieo cau`(tu cu; nghia cu) Throw at random a ball on one of one's suitors (and he became elegible).#b) Get married
gieo giat`Melodious
gieo gio`Askew and deformed
gieo neo`Hard
gieo que`Cast coins (ised as dice; of a fortune-teller)
gieo rac`to scatter; to disseminate
gieo trong`Sow and plant; cultivate
gieo van`Find rhymes (strictly according to prosody)
giep`flat; fattened
giep lep`Flat
giet`to kill; to murder#o butcher; to slaughter (animals)
giet choc`Kill, slaughter (noi khai quat)
giet hai`to kill, to murder
giet nguoi`Homicide
giet thit`to slaughter
gieu`to joke; to jest; to banter
gieu cot`to ridicule, to fool
gin`to keep; to preserve
gin giu`to conserve; to take care of
gio`(tieng dia phuong) (nhu tro) Ashes#Death anniversary#Gio tran Dong Da cung la ngay gio chung cua dan toc Viet Nam vao ngay mong 5 thang gieng am lich, ky niem ngay vua Quang Trung dai pha quanThanh nam ky dau 1789. Dan Viet Nam nho ngay gio tran Dong Da de tuong niem chien cong oanh liet cua tien nhan, dong thoi chung to long tu bi cua dan Viet doi voi ke thu. Held on the 10th of the lunar third month every year, Kings Hung's anniversary is the most important one to Vietnamese people.* Held on the 5th of the lunar first month every year, Dong Da victory's anniversary - also common to all Vietnamese people - evokes Emperor Quang Trung's resounding victory over the Qing aggressors in 1789. This anniversary highlights not only the Vietnamese people's glorious feats, but also its great benevolence towards Qing aggressors#Intimidate#nhu tro#Open (a book), unfold (a newspaper, a folder shirt...)#ull, make#Rush forward#basket#hour#ime#leg; foot pie#nhu do#to show; to raise#wind; air
gio bac`North-easterlly wind
gio bao`windstorm#windstorm, hurricane, cyclone
gio bi`Pork and skin paste
gio bui`Blowing dust and wind#roubled (times).#ard, full of ups and downs
gio cao diem`The peak hour
gio chap`Anniversaries and ancestor- worshipping days (noi khai quat)
gio chot`last moments#atest
gio chung`nhu tro chung
gio da`nhu tro da
gio dau`Year's mind
gio day`now, at present
gio dong`Easterly wind#pring wind, spring, breeze, vernal breeze.#he peach blossom of yester-year was still smiling at the vernal breeze
gio giac`the time, the hours
gio gioi`Complicate matters (by doing something not absolutely necessary)#nhu tro troi
gio giong`nhu tro giong
gio heo may`Autumnal cold breeze
gio het`Second year's mind
gio hon`Beware what you do, mind what you are about
gio lam them`vertime
gio lao`Hot and dry westerly wind (from Laos to Central Vietnam)
gio lau`(cung noi hoi lau) Long while
gio loc`whirlwind
gio lua`Lean pork paste#draught
gio mat`nhu tro mat
gio may`Wind
gio minh`nhu tro minh
gio mo`Lean and fat pork paste
gio mua`Wind and rain#nclemency; bad weather.#van chuong) Misadventure#monsoon
gio nom`south wind
gio phut`the moment
gio que`nhu tro que
gio ranh`pare time
gio thu`Pig's head paste
gio trang`Wind and moon; natural scenery#Amorous, erotic
gio vang`Autummal wind, autommal breeze
gio xoay`Cyclone
gio xuong`gay gio xuong#o be nothing but skin and bone
gioc`to plait (hair)
gioi`Rose-apple; rose-apple tree#Talauma (cay)#good; well; fine; skilled#maggot#set; circle; world#to dart; to shine; to flash#to polish; to burnish#to pour; to dash#xem troi
gioi chuc`Authrities
gioi giang`nhu gioi (voi y mia mai)#xem troi trang
gioi han`limit; term; bound
gioi luat`Buddhist discipline of abstinence
gioi mai`xem giui mai
gioi nghiem`Proclaim martial law, impose a curfew
gioi sac`(ton) Forbid sexual intercourse
gioi sat`(ton) Forbid killing
gioi thieu`to present; to introduce
gioi tinh`sex
gioi tu`preposition
gioi tuu`Abstain from alcoholoc drink
gioi tuyen`Demarcation line
gioi yen`Abstain from opium-smoking, give up opium-smoking
gion`Pinch#brittle; fragide; crispy#to play; to tease; to joke#to wander
gion gia`nhu gion #esounding
gion gion`Babbling, glib (noi ve tre em)
gion giot`nhu nhon nhot
gion tan`Very crisp#ounding forth in clanging peals
gion toc gay`of hair) to stand on end
giong`(tieng dia phuong) (nhu trong) Plant, grow#Have a run of hard luck (after coming across some ominous person or thing)#accent#one, voice; intonation#internode#ail, bar#to prod with beatings of#kind; race; breed; gender; sex#to look like; to resemble#to raise#to run fast; to hasten
giong dieu`Tongue; tone
giong gia`Repeatedly promise to do somethinng
giong giong`xem giong (lay)
giong het`As like as two peas
giong kim`prano
giong loai`pecimen
giong luoi`lingo, tongue
giong ma`eeds [for sowing] (noi khai quat)
giong mot`ord by word
giong nguoi`uman race
giong noi`race#voice
giong ruoi`to travel far away
giong tai`o prick up one's ears
giong tho`ass
giop`Blister
giot`drop
giot chau`(van chuong, tu cu; nghia cu) Tear-drops, tears
giot mau`rop of blood
giot mua`aindrop
giot nuoc`rop of water
giot sanh`(ddo^.ng) Long-horned grasshoper
giot suong`ewdrop
giu`o shake#to keep; to guard; to retain; to hold; to maintain
giu cho`o book seats
giu giang`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu giu gin
giu gin`nhu giu (noi khai quat)
giu giu`xem ru ru
giu ke`Show excessive caution (in one's deallings), be overcautious
giu kin`o hide; to keep secret
giu lai`Detain, stop the circulation of
giu le`Observe etiquette
giu loi`to keep one's words, to live up to one's word
giu mieng`Be cautious in one's words, hold one's tongue#Stand (be) on one's guard
giu minh`nhu giu than
giu phep`Observe one's duty
giu rit`Hold oast; keep something selfishly for oneself
giu suc khoe`o take care of one's health
giu tieng`Be cautious about one's repulation, be jealous of one's reputation
giu tiet`Keep one's chastity (said of a widow who does not marry again)
giu trat tu`o maintan order
giu tre`Mind children, work in a kindergarten
giu vung`Hold fast
giu y`Be thoughtful
giua`Drawn-thred work, drawn-work, hem-stitch#ile#o file (fig) to elaborate to perfection#middle; among; midst
giua trua`oon; mid-day
giui`o push; to slop; to slide#wl
giui mat`o rub one's eyes
giun`worm
giun chi`Filaria
giun dat`earthworm
giun dot`Annelid
giun dua`ascarid
giun kim`pinworm
giun moc`Hookworm
giun san`Parasitical worms(noi khai quat)
giun toc`Hairworm, trichocephalus
giun tron`Nematode
giuong`ed#to spread
giuong buom`o spread the sails
giuong mat`o look at with wide open-eyes
giuong vay`(thong tuc) Put on airs, make a show of strength
giup`o help; to aid; to assist
giup ich`o be of service to
giut`to pull; to wrench; to jerk
giut minh`o start; to give a start
go`(cung noi troi go) Tie fast, pinion#Nurse a strain (of sweet potato)#edge#mound; knoll#to bend; to curve#ominous, inauspicious#prominent; protu berant#to disengage; to unravel; to pick; to take up#to knock; to drum; to chime; to strike#wood; timber wood#woof; weft
go bia`Slab (of timber)
go bo`affected
go cay`Rough timber
go dac`Sap-wood, alburnum
go dan`Plywood
go dau`Comb one's hair straight, brush one's hair free of tangles
go dong`Hills and mounds (noi khai quat)
go ep`Constrain (to follow some rule of behaviour)
go gac`(thong tuc) nhu go
go ghe`rough; uneven
go kien`Woodpecker (chim)
go ma`cheek-bone
go min`Clear (a place) of mines; demine
go no`Get clear of one's debts
go roi`to disentangle; to disembroil
go suc`Timber
go toi`Exculpate
goa`idowed#widowed
goa bua`idow#widow
goc`(Math) angle alternate angle#orner; angle#Bamboo stock#tocky#thong tuc) Big (noi ve nguoi)#foot; origin
goc canh`Aspects (of a problem)
goc gac`Origin
goc ghep`(nong) Stock
goc phan`(van chuong, tu cu; nghia cu) Native country
goc re`Root, root and branch. root
goc tich`Origin
goc tu`(van chuong, tu cu; nghia cu) Naative country#arents#Quater.#toan) Quadrant
goi`Handful of rice eras just cut#an-palm#dish make of raw fish and vegetables#pack; parcel; bundle#to pack; to parcel up; to bundle#pillow; cushion knee#to call; to hail#to revive; to rouse; to evoke; to excite#to send; to consign#o lodge; to deposit#to wash
goi cam`Suggestive
goi cua`Knock at the door
goi dien thoai`o call up; to telephone to
goi diep`(tu cu; nghia cu, van chuong) Beautiful dream
goi gam`nhu goi ghem#to recommend
goi ghem`cung noi goi gam#rap up neatly#ut neatly in a nutshell#nhu goi
goi hon`Conjure up a deal person's soul (and invite in to give a message to a medium).#Thuat goi hon) Necromancy
goi la`As a makeshift, provisionally#or form's sake, perfunctorily
goi lai`Reminisce about
goi linh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Mobilize, call up, draft
goi loan`(tu cu; nghia cu,van chuong) Wedded oair's pillows, bridal pillows
goi thau`Call upon contractors (tenderers)
goi vu`Grow an overlaping crop
goi xep`Folding pillow
goi y`Suggest
gom`Baked clay, terra-cotta, pottery#eraser#loathsome; disgusting; horrible#to be afraid of; scared of#to comprise; to consist of ; to include#to gather; to collect
gom ghe`Frightful, horrible, disgusting
gom ghiec`nhu gom
gom gop`Save up
gom guoc`nhu gom
gom mat`Destest, hate (even the sight of)
gon`Neat, tidy#hode, entire, complete#omplete for the time being#Sedge#eap up#cotton-wool; kapok#goal#wavy; ripple
gon gang`clean-lembed
gon ghe`Pleasingly tidy
gon gon`xem gon (lay)#xem gon (lay)
gon lon`Snugly
gon mat`attractively tidy
gong`frame; framework#invulnerable#stocks; cang; cangue
gong cum`Cangue and stocks.#b) Slavery#eprive of one's freedom, chain
gong ganh`Carry (on one's shoulder) with a pole and two hangers
gong kim`Pincers's handle, pincer' jaw#incer movement
goong`Waggon
gop`Add up#to collect; to contribute
gop chuyen`Join in a conversation
gop mat`to do one's bit, to attend
gop nhat`to pick up, to collect adds and ends
gop phan`to take part in, to participate in
gop suc`to give hands to, to contribute
gop vao`to add
gop von`o join capital in a business
gop y`Offer advise, make suggestions
got`heel#to clean#to skim, to scum#to whittle; to sharpen
got giua`polish with great care
got ngoc`(tu cu; nghia cu, trtr) Majectic step
got rua`to wipe out
got sat`Iron heel
got sen`(tu cu; nghia cu, van chuong) Graceful feel (of a beautiful Woman)
got son`(tu cu; nghia cu, van chuong) Frail heels (of a beautiful woman)
got tien`(tu cu; nghia cu, van chuong) Fairy feet, dainty feet (of a beautiful woman)
gu`(of dod) to snarl#Sindora tree; sindora wood#f a brownish-back colour#Taste, liking#to coo
gu lung`unch-backed; hump-backed
guc`to bend down
guc gac`Nod one's assent
gui`dosser#to send, to give, to lay on
gui gam`to entrust, to recommend
gui re`(cung noi o re) Live at one's in laws' (noi ve nguoi chong)
gun`(cung noi gut) Small lump (on cloth)
gun ghe`Try to make approaches to a girl
gun gut`nhu gun
gung`(bot) ginger
guoc`wooden shoe; wooden clog
guoc chan`(ddo^.ng) Artiodactyl
guoc le`(ddo^.ng) Perissodactyl
guom`sword#to crowl, to glower#to stop; to wait a while
guom giao`nhu guom dao
guom guom`xem guom (lay)
guong`mirror; glass; looking-glass#reel ; reeling-machine#strained; forced; unnatural; reluctantly#to strain; to make efforts
guong day`o try to get up; to pick up
guong ep`Forced
guong gao`Strained; forced
guong loi`(ly') Convex mirror
guong lom`(ly') Concave mirror
guong mat`Look, expression of the face
guong mau`exemplary
guong may`machinery, apparatus
guong nga`(tu cu; nghia cu, van chuong) Phoebe, Phoebe's lamp, the moon
guong nhe`gingerly
guong phang`(ly') Plane mirror
guong sen`(tieng dia phuong) Lotus seed-pod
gut`knot
ha`exclamation of joy#shipworm teredo, borer sweet potato weevil#rive#give the kiss of life to#summer#to lower; to take down#to open wide#to open#content; satisfied#interrogative particle) Isn't it, aren't you
ha ba`the God of water
ha be`(thong tuc) Topple
ha bo`lower part of the abdomen
ha but`Set pen to paper
ha cam`Chancre
ha canh`to land; to touch down
ha cap`lower rank; lower class
ha chi`summer solstice
ha chinh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Harsh politics, ruthless politics
ha co`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu ha co#Lower the national flag (after a ceremony..)#to deign; to condescend
ha cong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Celebrate the victory of a battle.
ha da`To one's heart's content
ha de`Not at all easy
ha du`lowlands
ha gia`to lower the prices ; to debase
ha gian`to give way to anger
ha gioi`This world
ha giong`to speak down, to tone down
ha ha`aha; hee-haw;#xem cuoi ha ha
ha he`To one's heart fullest content, to satiety
ha hiep`to oppress, to domineer
ha hoc`to gape; to open wide one's mouth
ha hoi`(nhu Ha hoi phan giai) We'll see#Blow with a wide-open mouth#ive the kiss of life to, resuscitate#Lose flavour, lose scent, lose perfume
ha huyen`Last quarter of the moon
ha khac`very harsh, draconian, severe
ha khau`(tu cu; nghia cu) River estuary, river muoth
ha lam`(tu cu; nghia cu) Misappropriate
ha lenh`(xem) ha linh
ha linh`o order; to command
ha long`nhu ha da
ha luu`Lower section (of a river)#ower social classes (in the old society)
ha ma`Dismount (from one's horse)#Hippopatamus#hippopotamus
ha man`Lower the curtain
ha minh`to condescend; to demean oneself
ha nang`Scrotum
ha nghi vien`Lower House, House of Commons, House of Representatives (My)
ha nguc`Throw in jail
ha no`Not to be so hearless as
ha sach`Worse solution, worse course of action
ha sat`Kill
ha tan`Low-frequency
ha tan ha tien`Very thrifty
ha tang`(tu cu; nghia cu) Never#Lower layer
ha tat`What is the use of?, What is the good of?
ha thu`Kill (noi ve ke bat luong)
ha thu o`Multiflorous knootweed
ha thuy`o launch (a ship)
ha tien`(it dung) nhu de tien#miserly; stingy
ha tuan`Last ten days of a month
ha vien`xem Ha nghi vien (nt)
ha xa`(tu ha xa nt) Placenta
hac`black pungent#crane (fi) longevity#to criticize; to find fault with
hac am`Of the blackest dye, of the deepest dye
hac bach`Black and white; wrong and right
hac bua`nhu hoc bua
hac in`tar
hac lao`Ringworm
hac van`(it dung) Unlucky lot
hach`authoritarian authoritative#gland; (bool) nucleus#y hoc) Bubo#to examine; to demand satisfaction
hach dich`Imperious
hach nhan`nucleolus; nucleole
hach sach`to insist upon
hach toan`Keep business account#elf-supporting; non-financing by the state
hai`harmful; hurtful; damaging; deleterious#sea; ocean#shoes infant bones; remains#to fear; to dread; to be afraid of,#to pluck; to gather#two#double
hai au`gull; seamen
hai cang`port; harbour
hai cau`sea-dog; seal
hai cham`Colon
hai chien`Naval
hai cot`bones, remains
hai dam`(tu cu; nghia cu) Hamour
hai dang`lighthouse
hai dao`Sea route#island
hai dong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Infant, baby
hai duong`Amplexicaul tea
hai duong hoc`Oceanography
hai ha`sea and river (fig) generosity
hai hoa`Harmonious#harmonious
hai hung`Fearful, frightening.#he journey on thew uneven forest path was really fearful
hai huoc`comic; humorous
hai khau`Estuary
hai kich`comedy
hai long`double-barrelled (gun) double-face#satisfied
hai luc khong quan`Navvy, ground and air forces
hai luu`sea current
hai ly`autical mile
hai ma`ea-horse
hai mang`Double
hai mat`Double-faced.#Tinh hai mat) Duplicity
hai mien`Sponge
hai ngan`Seashore, seaside, sea coast
hai ngoai`oversea; foreign country
hai nhi`newly-born infant
hai phan`territorial waters
hai quan`custom-house#navy; naval forces
hai quan luc chien`Martne corps, marines
hai quy`(ddo^.ng) Actinia, sea-anemone
hai sam`Holothurian
hai san`Sea product
hai tac`pirate
hai than`Father and mother, parennts
hai trieu`Tide
hai van`Seal [-borne] tranport, maritime transport
hai vi`sea food
hai vo chong`he married couple
hai yen`salangane
ham`Nusty; smelling or tasting sour or stale#battleship#greedy for#greedy; eager; keen#jaw#honolary#to intimidate; to threaten#to rape; to violate; to ravish to harass to stop; to brake#to warm up; to make hot again#trench; vault; cellar#to stew; to braise; to simmer
ham an`Owe (someone) a favour
ham chuong`Be an amateur of
ham doa`Intimidate
ham doi`fleet
ham ech`Palate#ith a vaulted enntrance (like a frog's jaw)
ham gia`Set of artificial teeth
ham ha ham huc`xem ham huc (lay)
ham hai`to harm; to injure
ham ham`(khau ngu, it dung) Slightly crack-brained#angry; furious#nhu ham ham
ham ham ho ho`xem ham ho (lay)
ham hao`Shelters and trenches
ham hap`Nong ham hap#tiflingly hot#ery hot with fever; burning with fever#hottish
ham he`Be truculent, show truculence#be angrity spoiling for (a fight)#nhu ham he
ham hiep`Rape
ham hiu`unlucky; unfortune
ham ho`Vague, not founded on facts, ill-founded#with zeal; with fervour
ham hoe`Look threatening, look truculent
ham hoi`Unaired, air-tight, stifling
ham hu`nhu ham he#nhu ham hu
ham huc`Boil over with suppressed anger, burst with suppressed anger
ham lo`Pit
ham luong`(hoa hoc) Content
ham me`to be passionately fond of
ham mo`catacomb#mine#to like; to have admiration
ham muon`to desire; to cover
ham oan`Nurture resentment for an injustice suffered
ham rang`Denture, set of teeth
ham so`(toan) function
ham suc`to contain; to hold
ham tai`(thong tuc) Wearing an ominous look
ham thich`Be very fond of
ham thiec`bit
ham thu`By a correspondence course
ham tieu`Begin to open (noi ve nu hoa)
ham tru an`shelter-pit; dug-out
ham truong`Warship's captain
ham y`xem ham
han`cold poor#hatred; raueour; resentment#he; him#limit; term#drought#surely; certainly; completely; for good#to sweat; to perspire#trace#verdigris#xem gay han
han canh`(nong) Day farming
han che`to limit; to bound; to restrain
han cuu`(it dung) nhu han thu
han dien`Electric weilding
han dinh`Set a limit to, set a deadline to
han do`Fixed degree, fixed limit
han doi`Frigid Zone
han gan`to heal
han han`drought
han hanh`onour; to be honoured
han hep`limited, small; narrow
han hoan`merry; joyful
han hoc`Chinese studies; sinology#to bear a grudge
han hoi`Khong lam thi thoi nhung lam thi lam han hoi#ither do nothing or do something and do it thoroughly#Thorough, proper#nhu han xi
han huu`Rare, occasional#rare; scare
han khau`Stop a breach (in a dyke)
han la`Surely enough, certainly enough
han lam`Academic tile (mandarins's tile in the feudal regime).#Vien han lam) The Academy
han lam vien`nhu vien han lam (xem han lam)
han mac`(tu cu; nghia cu) Belles-lettres
han muc`Limit
han ngach`(kte) Limit; quota,
han nho`Poor Confucian scholar
han si`a poor student
han ta`that bloke, that fellow
han the`borax
han thu`Feud#nhu thu han
han thu bieu`thermometer
han thuc`Third lunar month's third day's festival
han tu`Chinese literature
han van`Chinese literature
han vi`poor and humble
han xi`Oxyacetylene welding
hang`Make a false step#nd abruptly#always; often#the moon#class; rank; kind; category#den; cave; hole; burrow#firm; company#fresh; frisky (hosre); acrid (smell)#goods; wares; merchandise#row; line; column#to yield; to surrender; to give in#groin#xem hay
hang an`Restaurant
hang binh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Second-class honours#Enemy solider who hasgone over
hang dang thuc`(toan) Identity
hang dau`top, top hit ; first-rate
hang di`(thong tuc) nhu hang mau
hang dong`Grotto; cave
hang giau`hedge
hang ha sa so`numberless ; countless
hang hac`xem hac (lay)
hang hai`ardent; fiery; fervent#navigation
hang hang`xem hang (lay)
hang hien`(tieng dia phuong) Verandah
hang ho`Goods bought and sold#usines is slack
hang hoa`Commodity, gods#goods ; merchandise
hang hoc`Burrows, holes (noi khai quat)
hang hum`Tiger's den#angerous place
hang kho`Groceries
hang khong`air-communication
hang khong mau ham`(tu cu; nghia cu) Aircraft carrier
hang lau`ontraband goods
hang loat`mass
hang luong`(toan) Constant
hang mau`(cung noi hang tiet) Have a flare-up of zeal (enthusiasm...)
hang muc`Article
hang muc cong trinh`Work
hang nga`(van chuong) Phoebe, the moon
hang ngay`daily, everyday
hang ngu`line; rank
hang nguoi`ind of man; sort of person
hang nuoc`Tea-shop
hang o`lair (of animals).#b) Den (of thieves...)
hang pho`The street people
hang phuc`Surrender unconditinally#Take ones hat off to
hang quan`Shops and inns (noi khai quat)
hang rao`fence; hedge
hang rong`hawker; pedlar
hang say`Be engrossed in, be utterly dedicated to 
hang so`constant
hang tam`Kind heart, kind-Generous#Woven cloth (for maing clothes) (noi khai quat)
hang than`Rebel having surrendered himself to a feudal regime
hang thang`onthly
hang thit`Butcher's shop
hang thu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Pass degree
hang tiet`nhu hang mau
hang tinh`Fixed star
hang tuan`eekly
hang uu`(tu cu; nghia cu) First-class honours
hang xach`Selling on commission
hang xao`Ricemiller
hang xen`haberdashery. aberdasher, small wares vendor
hang xom`neighbouring
hang xu`Stranger
hanh`apricot-tree#conduct; behaviour ; good nature#hot and dry (weather)#onion#to pertub
hanh binh`Be on the march, be on the move (noi ve quan doi)
hanh chanh`Administration
hanh chinh`Aministration
hanh cung`Royal step-over place
hanh dao`(tu cu; nghia cu) Pratise religion#Almond
hanh dien`to be proud; to show pride
hanh dinh`nhu hanh doanh
hanh doanh`(cung noi hanh dinh) Headquarters
hanh dong`to act
hanh ha`to maltreat; to ill-treat; to batter about
hanh hao`nhu hanh
hanh hat`(tu cu; nghia cu) Make one's round (of a mandarin)
hanh hinh`to execute; to put (a prisoner) to death
hanh hung`Commit assult and battery, indulge in violence
hanh huong`Go on a pilgrimage
hanh khach`passenger
hanh khat`to beg
hanh khuc`march
hanh kiem`conduct; behaviour
hanh kinh`Menstruate
hanh lac`to rejoice
hanh lang`galery; corridor; passage-way
hanh le`Celebrate (head) a [religious] ceremony
hanh ly`aggage; luggage
hanh nghe`Pratise a profession
hanh ngo`to make a lucky encounter
hanh nhan`Almond
hanh phap`executive
hanh phuc`happiness
hanh quan`operation
hanh quyet`nhu hanh hinh
hanh su`Peform some action, act
hanh tay`onion
hanh thong`easy; flowing
hanh tien`to be an upstart; to be a parvenu
hanh tinh`Planet
hanh toi`Punish#ortment, inflict mental torture on
hanh trang`nhu hanh ly
hanh trinh`itinerary
hanh tung`track, trail, whereabouts
hanh van`to compose, to style
hanh vi`act; action; deed
hanh xac`Mortify one's body
hao`eager; greedy#good; kind; beautiful#hao; dime#ditch; moat; dike; trench#to waste#vain; emply
hao chi`(tu cu; nghia cu, khau ngu) nhu hao (voi y cho la it oi)
hao han`brave; courageous man
hao hang`High class, high grade, high rate
hao hiep`galant; chivalrous
hao hoa`liberal; generous
hao hon`(khau ngu) nhu hao han
hao huc`enthusiatic
hao hung`Feel elated, feel highly enthusiastic#magnanimous
hao hut`Undergo some loss, diminish
hao huyen`Impracticable, fantastic
hao khi`(sinh hoc) Aerobic#spirit, magnanimity
hao kiet`hero
hao luy`Moat and bastions, defence work
hao mon`worn out
hao muc`(tu cu; nghia cu) Village notable, local influential person
hao nhien`straight; upright
hao nhoang`gandy; tandy; showy
hao phi`Waste
hao phong`open-handed
hao phu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Rich and influential
hao quang`halo; nimbus
hao tai`make money dwindle, becostly
hao tam`kindness; kind heart
hao ton`to waste; to spend much money
hao van`(tu cu; nghia cu) Twenty-cent coin
hao y`Good intention
hap`Stifling#to steam; to braise; to curse; to dry-clean (clothes)#to inhale; to absorb#to suit; to agree
hap dan`to attract,#atractive
hap hay`Have the tic of winking
hap him`Half-close (noi ve mat)
hap hoi`stuffy, close#to be about to die; to be moribund
hap ta hap tap`xem hap tap (lay)
hap tap`hasty, hurried
hap thu`Absorb, take in#to absorb; to receive, to imbibe
hat`corn; grain#to desh; to throw#to push; to throw; (of horse) to fling#to sing
hat cang`Supplant, oust and take the place of
hat de`Chesnut
hat giong`Seed
hat ham`Jerk up one's chin (as a sign)
hat hau`kick (of a horse)
hat hiu`to blow gently; to flicker
hat hoi`to sneeze
hat hui`neglect#to neglect
hat le`ears
hat luu`Tiny cube pomegranate seed-shaped)
hat nhan`Nuclear (of an action)
hat tieu`peppercorn
hat trai`Pearl
hat xiec`ircus
hau`Be always iaiet to [have one's desire met]#back; behind; future#queen; empress#kind; good; delicious#oyster#to serve in order to#marquis#fauces#monkey
hau ban`Waiter, waitress
hau bao`fob, belt purse
hau bi`Reserve
hau binh`Rearguard
hau bo`(tu cu; nghia cu) Mandarin-to-be
hau boi`Carbuncle on the spine
hau bong`Get into a trance (and act as a medium)
hau can`Army ordnance, logistics#trusted servant
hau canh`(hoa) Background
hau chien`After-war
hau chuyen`to keep company with
hau co dien`Post-classic
hau cung`Queen's apartments#hrine, sanctuary (of a communal house or temple)
hau dai`Entertain lavishly, treat with cosideration#Posterity, future generations
hau dau`Awkward, lubberly
hau doi`Rearguard
hau duong`Building at the back of a mansion
hau ha`to attend; to attend on
hau hau`xem hau (lay)
hau het`almost; nearly
hau kien`(tu cu; nghia cu) Appear before the court (to face trial)
hau mon`anus
hau nghiem`(triet hoc) A posteriori
hau nhu`Almost
hau phau`(y) Post-operational
hau phi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Wife of the king
hau phuong`rear
hau qua`consequence
hau quan`Rearguard
hau san`post-natal
hau sang`Waiter (in a Chinese restaurant)
hau sinh`Person of a younger generation, junior
hau su`Funeral, burial observances
hau ta`Show deep gratitude for, reward liberally
hau tap`Attack in the rear
hau than`Posterior personification, eventual impersonation
hau the`posterity, future generations
hau thuan`Force in support in the rear, support rear troops#support; backing
hau thuoc dia`Post-colonial
hau tien`Lagging behind, backward
hau tinh`Considerate treatment (of others), decent behaviour (towards others)
hau to`uffix
hau truong`backstage
hau tu`(ngon ngu hoc) Postposition
hau tuoc`Marquis, marquess
hau tuyen`Rear line
hau van`future; futurity
hau ve`Back (in football)
hau vien`(quan) Reinforcements
hay`Badly done (of rice, cake...)#let; let's; still; yet#to look askance at; to look black at someone#to push#well; grad; interesting#to lear; to hear of; to come to know of
hay biet`know
hay chu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Learned, schlarly, well-read
hay con`up to now; still
hay dau`Do not expect
hay do`Good and bad, good or bad
hay hay`Rosy, ruddy#Whiffing#xem hay (lay)
hay ho`(mia) Nice
hay hom`(nghia xau) Nice
hay la`(nhu) hay
hay lam`Hard-working, diligent, industrious
hay lay`ontagious
hay nhi`Strangely enough, how od
hay sao`Isn't it?
he`(khau ngu) Throw, fling away (a tray of food in a fit of anger...)#Open slightly#reak#branch, system#clown; funny-man#fish of carp family#if; whenever#shallot; scallion#summer#sidewalk; pavement
he chi`Matter
he gi`nhu he chi
he ha`satisfied; content
he han`(tieng dia phuong) nhu he
he he`Grin broadly (naively or one's embarrassment away)
he hui`Try collectively to
he luan`Corollary
he luy`Social ties; family ties
he mo`to half-open
he moi`o open one's lips
he nang`to break
he qua`consequence
he rang`to open one's mouth
he so`Coefficient
he thong`system; network; chanel; net
he thong hoa`Systematize
he trong`important; vital; capital
he tu`(triet hoc, ngon ngu hoc) Copula
hec ta`Hectare
hech`(xau) Gape#to raise; to lift up
hech hoac`gaping
hech mom`o gape
hem`alley; lane#draff
hem hep`xem hep (lay)
hen`asthama#base; vile#umble, mean, poor#mussel#to appoint; to date; to promise#to be lucky; in luck; to be in luck's way
hen chi`(cung noi hen gi) That is why, therefor, no wonder
hen ha`vile; mean; despicable
hen ho`to make a date, to date with
hen kem`Mean
hen mat`very mean, very base
hen mon`humble, low
hen nao`nhu hen chi
hen nhat`cowardly; dastardly
hen suyen`Asthma
hen uoc`(van chuong) promise
hen yeu`pusillanimous, faint-hearted
henh`(Henh mui) Hold up one's head, bridle
henh hech`(Cuoi henh hech) To smile naively, to smile artlessly
heo`cudgel#faded; dead; withered#hog; pig; swine
heo hat`desolate#to fade; to wither
heo hon`waste away. heo hon
heo hut`solitary, out-of-the-way
heo lanh`solitary; remote; secluded
heo may`ay Coldish north-westerly wind (blowing in autumn)
heo nai`ow raised for breeding
heo quat`Shrivel[up]
heo quay`oast pork
heo voi`Raphis pallm. raphis stick, raphis cane
hep`narrow; confined; strait
hep bung`Narrow-minded, narrow
hep luong`ngenerous, illiberal
het`As like as two peas#to cry; to roar; to scream#to finish; to end; to expire; to come to an end
het ca`All and sundry, all without exception
het cach`Have tried every means, have exhauted all resources, have left no stone unturned
het doi`(nghia xau) Be dead and gone
het hoi`to lose one's breath
het hon`out of one's wets
het le`Exhaust one's arguments
het loi`Finish speaking#xhaust one's argument (words)
het long`heartily; with all one's heart
het muc`outstandinglly
het nhan`clean out of
het nuoc`Be at the end of one's tether
het rao`Completely out of
het sach`Clean out of
het suc`very; extremely
het thay`All, all and sundry
het thoi`have had one's day
het troi`nhu het sach#hu het troi (y manh hon)
het tron`nhu het sach
het trui`nhu het sach
het via`Frightened to death
het y`(thong tuc) Mightily, excessively
heu`trang heu very white
hi`(of horse) to whinny; to neigh#Blow (one's nose)#happy occasion (news...)#Hee-haw
hi ha hi hoay`xem hi hoay (lay)
hi ha hi huc`Be absorbed in, be engrossed in, be wrapped up in
hi ha hi hung`xem hi hung (lay)
hi hi`Chuckle#Whimper
hi hoay`to be busy with
hi hui`Be busy with (at), busy oneself with (at)
hi hung`Be beside oneself with joy
hi kich`Play, drame 
hi no`oy and anger
hi nu`appy occasion
hi sac`Happy look (on the face)
hi su`Happy occasion; wedding
hi tin`(tu cu; nghia cu) happy news
hi vien`theater; theatre#(tu cu; nghia cu) place of entertainment, playhouse##(tu cu; nghia cu) playhouse
hi xa`(it dung) Gladly and readily sacrifice oneself
hia`mandarin's boots
hich`proclamation#to jostle
hiem`Be in feud#dangerous; perilous#rare; scarce; sigular
hiem ac`wicked
hiem co`(nhu hiem) rare, scare
hiem dia`Place full of obstacles and difficult of access
hiem doc`perfidious
hiem gi`Not lacking
hiem hoa`Danger, peril#danger; peril
hiem hoc`ugged and inaccessible terrain
hiem hoi`Childness, having few children, sub-fertile
hiem khich`hate, be at olds with
hiem ngheo`dangerous, serious
hiem nghi`to suspect
hiem nguy`nhu nguy hiem
hiem oan`o bear a grudge
hiem thu`Nurture long-stading resentment
hiem tro`Full of obstacles and difficult of access
hiem vi`But infortunately
hiem yeu`Important and very difficult of access (noi ve dia the)
hien`meek; gentle; virtuous#parthouse#to offer; to devote; to consecrate#to rise; to appear; to come into sight
hien binh`Gendarme (in a capitalist country)
hien chuong`charter
hien dai`present time; contemporary period
hien dai hoa`modernize
hien dang`Dedicate
hien dat`make one's way in life, achieve a high position in society
hien de`(tu cu; nghia cu) Dear brother (used as adress to a youger brother or friend)
hien dien`present
hien dinh`Stipulated by the constitution
hien duc`Gentleness and virtue (thuong noi ve nguoi phu nu)
hien gio`At the present time
hien hach`Brilliant; glorious; splendid
hien hanh`in force; in operation
hien hau`Gentle and righteous
hien hien`Appear in clear vision, appear most visibly, appear vididly, be unmistaably clear
hien hinh`to appear
hien hoa`Gentle and good-mannered#meek and affable
hien huu`Existent now, existing,
hien huynh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Dear brother (used as adress to an elder brother of friend)
hien ke`Offer suggestions (to one's organization... for a better management...)
hien kho`(tieng dia phuong) Very good and gentle, very kind
hien lanh`Good-natured
hien linh`[Turn out be] awe-inspiringly powerul (noi ve than thanh)
hien mau`Kind mother, good mother
hien minh`Clear-cut, unequivocal, unmistakable
hien muoi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Dear sister (used as address to a youger sister or friend)
hien nay`nowadays, today
hien ngang`proud; haughty
hien nhan`Saage, wise person
hien nhien`evident; obvious; patent
hien phap`constitution
hien phap hoa`Constitutionalize
hien si`talented and virtous man
hien sinh`(triet hoc) Existentialism#Immolate; sacrifice
hien tai`Talented and righteous#present; existing; at present
hien than`Sacrifice one's life#Talented and righteous subject#personification, embodiment
hien thanh`Become a genie, achieve sainthood
hien the`Virtuous wife.#tu cu; nghia cu, van chuong) my good wife!
hien thoi`Now, at present
hien thuc`realistic
hien tien`In front of one
hien tinh`present situation
hien trang`present condition
hien triet`sage; philosopher
hien truong`Scene, place of action
hien tu`indulgent
hien tuong`phenomenon
hien vat`things in nature
hien vi`Microscopic#Kinh hien vi) A microscopic
hien vinh`nhu vinh hien
hieng`cross-eyed; squint-eyed
hieng hieng`xem hieng (lay)
hiep`round (Box); (football) half#to oppress
hiep dam`to violate; to rape; to ravish
hiep dinh`convention; agreement
hiep dong`to contract
hiep hoi`association
hiep khach`Knight, knight-errant
hiep luc`Combine efforts, join efforts
hiep nghi`Agreement
hiep si`knight
hiep tac`(tu cu; nghia cu) Co-operate
hiep thuong`to negotiate
hiep troc`Force, compel, bully
hiep uoc`agreement; pact; compact; treaty
hieu`pious#mourning#to have; to like; to be fond of#shop; store#to grasp; to comprehend; to understand
hieu biet`to know
hieu chien`combative; bellicose; warlike
hieu chinh`to regulate
hieu chu`Eldest son of a parent whose burial is under way
hieu danh`Fame-seeking person
hieu de`rutiful to one's parents and submissive to one's edder brother
hieu dinh`to revise
hieu dong`Active, restless
hieu du`(tu cu; nghia cu) (cung noi hieu thi) Make clear something to
hieu dung`Useful
hieu hanh`Dutiful (toward one's parents)
hieu hoc`Fond of learning
hieu khach`Hospitable
hieu khi`(sinh hoc) Aerobic
hieu ky`urious; inquiring
hieu lam`to misundertand; to misconcerve
hieu lenh`order, command
hieu luc`effective; efficacious; available
hieu nang`Efficiency, output
hieu nghia`Dutiful and loyal
hieu nghiem`efficacious
hieu qua`result; effect
hieu sac`Fond of beautiful women
hieu sinh`Kind to animals, reluctant to kill animals
hieu so`difference
hieu su`Fond of contriving unnecessary things, showing undue zeal
hieu suat`productivity, output
hieu thang`Envious and fond of surpassing others
hieu thao`pious
hieu the`Potential difference
hieu thi`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu hieu du
hieu thuan`nhu hieu de
hieu trieu`Appeal to, call upon (the masses)
hieu truong`head master ; principal#penalty ; sentence ; punishment#picture; portrait; photograph
hieu tu`Dutiful child, dutiful son
him`(thong tuc) Child's vulva#ittle girl, tiny chit
him him`Be unable to open wide (noi ve mat)
hinh`Appearance, outward look, shape, figure#nhu hinh hoc) Geometry#hotograph, picture#to turn up;
hinh dang`figure, stature#form, shape
hinh dong`(tu cu; nghia cu) apperance, outward look#ee in one's mind's eye, imagine, picture to oneself
hinh dung`appearance#to figure; to imagine
hinh dung tu`(tu cu; nghia cu) (nhu tinh tu) Adjective
hinh hai`Body, physical being
hinh hoa`Drawing
hinh hoc`geometry
hinh hop`Parallelepiped
hinh lap phuong`Cube
hinh luat`Penal laws
hinh mau`Model
hinh nhan`Paper and bamboo pupet (to be burned on worship)
hinh nhi thuong hoc`(tu cu; nghia cu) Metaphysics
hinh nhu`to seem ; to appear
hinh noi`Relief
hinh nom`Effigy, dummy
hinh non`Cone
hinh phat`Punishment, penalty
hinh quat`Sector
hinh su`(tu cu; nghia cu) Criminnal affairs
hinh thang`Trapezium
hinh the`Complexion, general aspect#opography, terrain#form; figue; conformation; likeness
hinh thu`(thuong nghia xau) nhu hinh dang
hinh thuc`Form
hinh thuc chu nghia`Formalistic
hinh thuc hoa`Formalize
hinh trang`Outward aspect (of things)
hinh tron`Circle
hinh tru`Cylinder
hinh tuong`Image, simile
hip`to be swollen; to close
hit`to inhale; to inspire; to breathe; to sniff
hiu hat`Blow gently (noi ve gio)
hiu hiu`Whiffing, puffing lightly
hiu quanh`deserted; lonely
ho`To sing out for, to shout for#o call on, to urge#o cry for#Vietnamese chanty, work song#o Hue (Hue chanty): With high lyric quality, Hue chanty is closely attached to the everyday working life. They play the O chanty with a passionate tune when treading water, mowing weed, harrowing, or following a buffalo treading on paddy. They play the Do Hay chanty with a slow and sad tune when doing some light piece of job (hashing potatoes, chopping marsh-lentil, weaving cloth, lulling a baby..). The Ho Bui chanty has a+reasonably fast and rythmical air: One puts forward a tune, and another responds. They play the Nen chanty when building a road or a dyke, the Nen Voi chanty when pounding lime, even the Gia Gao chanty when grinding rice... The river chanties consist of Day Nuoc (pushing water), Mai Day (played when an overloaded boat crosses a waterfall, a very fast flow or strong waves) with very lively parallel sentences, and Dua Ghe (boat race). With no sneering hints, the Mai Nhi tender chanty alluding to warm trysts and heart-rending moans is played when the weather is attractively calm. In addition, there are Ru con (lulling a baby) and Dua Linh (attending a funeral) chanties#hole; grave; tomb#lake paste#to glue; to starch#mortar#last name ; family name#tontine#reserved; keep for future use#tiger#to blunder#to cough#to cry out#to dry#uncovered; gaping; open
ho bo`(tu cu; nghia cu) Ministry of Finance
ho cam`Hu violin (musical instrument of the Hu nationality in China)
ho chieu`passport
ho co`Let the cat out of the bag; expose unintentionally one's weak spot
ho cot`Tiger bone
ho dao`Parish
ho de`Maintain the dykes#Not easy at all
ho diep`(van chuong) Butterfly
ho do`obscure
ho duong`nhu ho hang
ho ga`whooping-cough
ho gia`(tu cu; nghia cu) Be a member of the royal retinue, be a royal escort, be a royal bodyguard
ho gio`Light cough caused by a cold
ho hai`Going through lakes and seas; high-flying (noi ve chi khi nguoi
ho hang`Scanty, low-necked#relation; relatives
ho hao`Call upon, appeal to
ho hap`to breathe; to respire
ho he`(tieng dia phuong) nhu ho he#Act against, perform hostile activities against; speak up
ho hen`nhu hen ho#to cough
ho het`(nghia xau) Shout and scream (for something)
ho ho`(Cuoi ho ho) To guffaw#In the bloom of youth, in the glow of juvenile beauty (noi ve co gai)
ho hoan`Shout (for help...), scream (for help...)
ho hoi`Jovial, cheerful
ho hung`Indifferent, cool
ho khan`Dry cough, hacking cough
ho khau`Earn one's living, feed one's own mouth#Tiger's mouth#and's radial side#population; number of inhabitants
ho khoan`Heave ho, yo-heave-ho
ho la`to shout, to scream
ho lai`(tu cu; nghia cu) Village registrar (keeping records of births, deaths and marriages)
ho lang`Cats, wild fierce animals, ferocious beasts (noi khai quat)
ho lao`tuberculosis ; phthisis
ho li`Croupier (at a gambling table)
ho lo`Blue, apply blue to (laundry)#Wine gourd
ho lon`Hotchpotch-like, miscellaneous
ho lua`xem ran ho lua
ho ly`urse's aid
ho mac`nhu ho hang
ho mai day`Barcarolle (boatwomen's songs in Hue)
ho mang`(tieng dia phuong) nhu ho menh#xem ran ho mang
ho menh`Tutelary
ho moi`Open one's lips
ho nghi`to doubt; to discredit
ho ngoai`Distaff-side relations, wife's blood relations, distaff-side line of descent, wife's life of descent
ho nguc`Low-necked (of dress)
ho noi`Spear-side relations, hushand's blood relations, staff-side line of descent
ho phach`amber
ho phap`Names of the two colossal statues guarding the main gate of a pagoda#ighest Caodai dignitary#iant, colossus
ho phu`Ancient military officers' tigerhead-shaped seal (insignia..)#iger-faced design#b) (thong tuc) Face bloated with anger
ho quang`(ly) Arc
ho reo`to acclaim
ho san`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu ho sinh
ho si`(tu cu; nghia cu) Nurse
ho sinh`Midwife
ho so`file; record
ho suon`(quan) Expose the flank
ho tam`wimming-pool
ho tang`See to a burial
ho than`Be ashamed of one's condition#seft-protection
ho then`shameful; ashamed
ho thi`(tu cu; nghia cu; van chuong) Bow and arrow; young man's ambition in life
ho thuy`Pale blue
ho tich`civil status
ho tieu`Pepper#nhu ho xi
ho tinh`Mythical fox turned human
ho tong`to escort
ho tro`to help one another
ho truong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Army commander's headquarters
ho tuong`Brave and strong general#Reciprocal, mutual, interacting
ho vai`De'collete' (of dress)
ho ve`to guard
ho xi`Latrine
hoa`(nhu hoa hoc) Chemistry#Catastrophe, disaster#misfortune#painting#to draw; to paint; to delineate#nswer (someone's poem) with another using the same rhyme and meter#erform in unison#to accompany#espond#Fire#ang, male and positive principle (in Eartern medicine)#fire#flower; bloom; blossom#issolve#nd in a draw, draw#to become; to change; to transform#to mix; to mingle; to dissolve#reak even#even; draw ; end in a draw#gree, get on well with one another#peace#nhu hoa binh
hoa am`Harmony (in music)
hoa bai`Emergency pass (used by messengers carrying the king's urgent orders)
hoa bao`pictorial, pictorial picture
hoa bia`Hop
hoa binh`Peace#eaceful
hoa buom`Pansy
hoa ca`(Mau hoa ca) Lilac
hoa can`Seeds of misfortune
hoa chang`Unless
hoa chat`Chemical substance, chemicals#chemiscals
hoa chau`lare
hoa cong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Limner#Attack with fire, use fire as an offensive weapon#The Creator
hoa cuong`Granite
hoa dau`Petrochemistry
hoa diem son`(tu cu; nghia cu) Volcano#volcano
hoa do`lan
hoa don`nvoice; bill
hoa duoc`Pharmaceutical chemistry
hoa gia`o price
hoa giai`Mediate, conciliate#to mediate; to conciliate; to reconcile
hoa hau`the Queen of beauty, miss beauty
hoa hien`day-lity
hoa hoan`(cung noi hoa tai) Fire, blaze#Detente#Very occasionally, far between, once in a blue moon#fire
hoa hoc`Chemistry#chemistry
hoa hoet`showry
hoa hong`rose, commission
hoa hop`o agree, to harmonize ; in concord, in agreement
hoa hue`Tuberose
hoa ke`(ly') Pyrometer
hoa khi`oncord, agreement
hoa khoi`Beauty queen, belle
hoa ky`merica
hoa la`On the chance of (that), perhaps.
hoa le`plendid, replendent
hoa lieu`(hinh anh) brothel
hoa lo`Cauliflower#Portable earthen stove
hoa loi`income
hoa long`Liquify
hoa luc`Fire-power, fire#fire power
hoa mat`Be dazzled
hoa mau`Farm produce, fruits of the earth
hoa may`On the chance ot (that)
hoa mi`nightingale
hoa mo`White-dotted
hoa my`ine; beautiful; florid; flowery
hoa ngon`(tu cu; nghia cu) Bragging words
hoa nguyet`(cung noi nguyet hoa) Sensual love
hoa nha`ffable
hoa nhac`oncert; musical entertainment
hoa nhip`o keep pace with
hoa nien`Bloom of youth
hoa phan`Chemical analysis
hoa phao`uze
hoa qua`fruits
hoa ram`Grey-haired, grey, pepper-and-salt
hoa sen`Lotus. hoa sen#hower-bath
hoa si`artist, painter
hoa soi`Cholorantus.#Hoa hoe hoa soi) Gaudy
hoa tai`Ear-ring#nhu hoa hoan
hoa tan`Dissolve#to dissolve
hoa tang`o cremate
hoa tay`Dexterity, deftness
hoa thach`ossil
hoa thi`Rose-shaped design, rosette design
hoa thuan`o concord; to be in accord
hoa tien`(tu cu; nghia cu) Flower-filigreed paper (to write letters or poems on)#Rocket, missile#rocket; missile
hoa tieu`pilot; navigator
hoa tim`Violet
hoa tinh`Amorous, erotic#Chemical propriety#[The planet] Mars
hoa tra`Camelia
hoa trang`o camouflage; to disguise oneself
hoa tri`(hoa hoc) Valence, valency
hoa van`Design (on pottery and brass objects)#Rhyme compose verses (to a given rhyme)
hoa vien`(tu cu; nghia cu) Flower-garden
hoa xa`rain
hoa xoe`(tu cu; nghia cu) One-piastre silver coin (under the French domination)
hoac`Open wide#very
hoac gia`Perhaps; or
hoac huong`(thuc, duoc hoc) Patchouli
hoac la`Or, either
hoac le`(tu cu; nghia cu; van chuong) Vegetable; simple dish, frugal fare
hoac loan`tu cu; nghia cu) Cholera
hoach dinh`to form; to define; to determine
hoai`Constantly, repeatedly#[Be] Completely decomposed compost#always; continually; endlessly#arbotive
hoai bao`Hope, dream, ambition
hoai cam`Remember (recollect) with emotion
hoai co`to remember things in the past
hoai cua`What a pity
hoai nghi`to doubt
hoai niem`to think of
hoai phi`Waste, squander
hoai son`Oppositifolius yam
hoai thai`Be with cjild, gestate, have a pregnancy
hoai than`Commit self-destruction#hu hoai than
hoai thu`gangrene; canker
hoai tu`Necrosis
hoai vong`to long for
hoai xuan`Long for vernal time.#b) Feel nostalgia for past love emotions
hoam`Sunken, deep
hoan`Refine and boil down#pill#to return; to give back; to restore#to castrate; to evirate; to geld#to defer; to postpone; to delay; to put off
hoan bi`Complete, thorough, full
hoan binh`Put off the fighting, postpone a battle#emporize, try to gain time, use dilatory tactics
hoan cai`Turn over a new leaf, reform, give up one's bad ways for a good life
hoan canh`element; circumstances; evironment
hoan cau`the world
hoan chinh`Fully worked-out, fully done, fully made.
hoan chuyen`o exchange post
hoan do`(tu cu; nghia cu) (cung noi hoan lo) Mandarin's career
hoan dong`(Cai lao hoan dong) Rejuvenate oneself
hoan du`metonymy
hoan hao`Smoothly done, successfully done#erfect
hoan hi`joyful; delighted
hoan ho`to cheer; to acclaim (in wood)
hoan hon`Come to, recover consciousness (after fainting)#ecover one's composure, regain one's calm (after a fright)
hoan lac`merry, joyful, cheerful
hoan lac chu nghia`Hedonist
hoan lo`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu hoan do
hoan luong`Turn over a new leaf, reform (noi ve gai diem)
hoan my`erfectly beautiful
hoan nan`calamity; misfortune; disaster
hoan nghenh`Welcome, give a cheerful reception to
hoan nguyen`Revert to the orginal state
hoan no`(luat) Moratory
hoan quan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Eunuch
hoan tan`Powdered medicine and pills, medicine in pills and in powder
hoan tat`to complete, to finish
hoan thanh`to accomplish; to complete; to finish; to end
hoan thien`to perfect
hoan toan`complet; perfect; entirely; faultless
hoan tuc`Give up the frock, terurn to the secular life
hoan vi`to permute
hoan vu`the universe
hoan xung`(co hoc; co khi') Deaden a shock, act as a buffer
hoang`Muntjac#Pervading (noi ve mui hoi thoi)#female phoenix king; emperor, prince (noi tat)#yellow#ncultivated; uninhabited; virgin#panic-stricken; to be in terror
hoang an`Royal favour
hoang anh`(cung noi vang anh, hoang oanh) Oriole
hoang bao`(tu cu; nghia cu) Royal robe
hoang chung`(tu cu; nghia cu) Yellow race
hoang cung`imperial palace; royal palace
hoang da`Desolate and waste
hoang dai`wild
hoang dam`lustful
hoang dan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Jaundice, the yellows
hoang dao`Desert island#Zodiac
hoang de`Emperor
hoang dia`Waste land
hoang dien`Uncultivated field
hoang duong`fabulous
hoang gia`royal family
hoang giap`Second-rank doctor (in court feudal competition - examination)
hoang hau`Queen
hoang hoac`xem hoac (lay)#xem hoac (lay)
hoang hon`desk; sunset; evening twilight#nhu hoang
hoang hot`to panic
hoang kim`Gold
hoang lan`(thuc) Ylang ylang
hoang mac`(ddi.a) Desert
hoang mang`puzzled, alarmedd
hoang oanh`oriole
hoang phai`Royal blood
hoang phe`deserted, win
hoang phi`extravagant
hoang so`illed with terror; panic-stricken
hoang tan`devastated
hoang thai`Unborn child out of wedlock, unborn illegitimate child; illegitimate pregnancy
hoang thai hau`Queen mother
hoang thai tu`Crown prince
hoang than`prince
hoang thanh`Royal citadel, imperial citadel
hoang that`Royal blood
hoang thien`Heaven
hoang tho`(ddi.a) Loess
hoang thuong`sir; his majesty
hoang tinh`Arrowroot
hoang toang`Lavish, profligate, very extravagant
hoang toc`royal blood
hoang ton`King's grandson, queen's grandson
hoang trieu`Reigning king's court
hoang tu`prince
hoang tuong`(y) Delirium
hoang tuyen`Styx, hades, nether world
hoang vang`Deserted, unfrequented
hoang vu`wild; desert; desolate
hoang yen`Serin, canary [bird]
hoanh`Find fault with someone's work (behaviour...)#nhu hoanh phi#it dung) Width#idge-pole, purlin#xem rao hoanh
hoanh cach mo`(tu cu; nghia cu) Diaphragm
hoanh do`Abscissa
hoanh hanh`to do whatever one like
hoanh hoe`nhu hoanh
hoanh phat`Suddenly rise from a low position
hoanh phi`Horizontal lacquered board (engraved with Chinese characters)
hoanh tai`ill-gotten gains
hoanh trang`on a large scale
hoat`Quick and fine (noi ve chu viet)#nhon hoat#ery pointed
hoat bat`fluent; brisk; agile
hoat chat`(hoa hoc, duoc hoc) Active element
hoat dau`(tu cu; nghia cu) Opportunist, time-serving
hoat dong`action; activity
hoat hinh`Animated cartoon
hoat hoa`caricature#nhu hoat hinh
hoat khau`(it dung) Have the gift of the gab, be voluble
hoat kich`Short comedy, sketch
hoat luc`(tu cu; nghia cu) Vitality
hoat thach`(tu cu; nghia cu) Talc
hoat tinh`Active
hoc`corner; angle#to have stuck in one's throat#hallow#to study; to learn; to read#unit of dry measure#to vomit
hoc ba`School report
hoc bong`scholarship
hoc bua`very hard; very difficult
hoc chinh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Education service (thoi thuoc phap)
hoc cu`Teaching aid, teaching implement
hoc doi`Ape, take a leaf out of the book of
hoc duong`school
hoc gao`(khau ngu) Mug up; bone up on
hoc gia`scholar; learned man; litery man
hoc ha hoc hech`xem hoc hech (lay)
hoc hac`gaunt; haggard
hoc ham`University teacher's rank
hoc hanh`Learn, study (noi khai quat)
hoc hech`Broad-minded, easy-going
hoc hiem`(nhu hiem hoc) Rugged and inaccessible
hoc hieu`(tu cu; nghia cu) School
hoc hoi`Investigate, inquire, learn
hoc khoa`Period of a curriculum
hoc lom`Pick up
hoc luc`capacity (of a student)
hoc mat`(giai) Orbit
hoc mau`Vomit blood#weat blood
hoc mot`Learn by bits and pieces
hoc on`Revise, review
hoc phai`(tu cu; nghia cu) School, school of thought
hoc phi`school fees
hoc phiet`Scholar-autocrat (who wants to monopolize scholar-lines, to suppress other's ideas for self-advancement)
hoc quan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Education official (thoi thuoc phap)
hoc sinh`Schoolboy, schoolgirl, pupil
hoc tap`Train, drill; learn study#ollow in the steps of
hoc thuat`Learning
hoc thuc`knowledge; learning
hoc thuyet`doctrine; teaching
hoc toc`Breathless
hoc tro`pupil; school boy; school girl
hoc van`(Sach hoc van) Syllabary, primer#Knowledge (gained from study), culture
hoc vi`University degree, university education diploma, post-universityu degree, post-university dip loma
hoc vien`institute#trainee
hoc xa`dormitory
hoc xi`(thong tuc) Get nothing at all, gain nothing
hoe`Reddish#Hoe hoe (lay, y giam)#sophora japonica
hoe hoe`xem hoe (lay)
hoen`Spotted, stained
hoen gi`Stained and rusty
hoen o`Stained
hoi`Dear, my dear (used to address an equal or inferior)#h.#Satisfy#Smelly (like mutton, beef fat...)#Steaming [hot]#oi hoi (lay)#The twelfth Earthly Branch (symbolized by the pig)#bad-smelling#to gather what is left#blad#cheap; inexpensive#club; company; association#to meet; to reunite; to assemble#gas; steam; air#time; period#to cancel#to ask; to question, to inquire; to interrogate#to repent; to regret; to rue#to press; to urge; to hurry
hoi am`drink together#to reply
hoi bai`Ask (pupils) quetions on a lesson
hoi cai`Show repentance and desire to redeem one's faults
hoi chan`(bac si) to hold a consultation
hoi cho`fair
hoi chung`syndrome
hoi cu`Return from evacuation
hoi cung`to interrogate, to question
hoi dam`Consult together, meet for a talk
hoi dau`What is the use of...?
hoi dien`Meet face to face#Round of performances (by dannce and song ensembles...)
hoi do`to investigate
hoi doai`xchange
hoi doc`Toxic gas, noxious gas
hoi don`Assail (ply) (somebody) with questions
hoi dong`Money, gold#reed always gets stirred up at the sight of gold#council; assembly; meeting
hoi duong`Resuscitative, having a resuscitative virtue (noi ve phuong thuoc)
hoi gan`Questions closed but gently
hoi giang`Teaching festival
hoi giao`Mohammedanism, Islam
hoi ha`Hurry, hasten
hoi ham`fetid
hoi han`to inquire after, to ask after#to repent; to rue
hoi he`Festival, gauds
hoi hoa`Painting
hoi hoi`xem hoi (lay)#xem hoi (lay)#xem hoi (lay)
hoi hop`Meet, gather#to flutter; to tremble with excitement#weakly
hoi huong`Anise#Remote relation (of parentage)#mell (of dirt, of uncleanlinessm, of disease)
hoi huu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Retire (on a pension)
hoi ki`memoir
hoi kien`Meet for a talk, meet for an exchange of views
hoi kin`Underground society
hoi kinh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Be recalled to the capital for instruction from the king
hoi lau`nhu gio lau
hoi lo`to bribe; to corrupt
hoi loan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Return to the capital (after a trip of out of it)#noi ve vua)
hoi men`Heady bouquet of alcohol
hoi mom`(cung noi hoi mieng) Have a bad (strong) breath, suffer from halitosis
hoi mon`Dowry, marriage portion
hoi nach`Have a body odour
hoi nay`Just now
hoi ngat`Asphyxiating gas
hoi nghi`conference; congress; meeting
hoi ngo`to meet
hoi nguyen`(tu cu; nghia cu) First laureate at pre-Court Copetition examination
hoi nho`Ask privately, ask under one's breath
hoi oi`Alas!
hoi phieu`Bill of exchange
hoi phuc`Recover
hoi qua`Regret one's faults
hoi quan`tu cu; nghia cu) Society's premises
hoi quy`(y) Recurrent
hoi rinh`Very stinking
hoi sinh`(sinh hoc) Commensalism#to resuscitate; to restore to life
hoi suc`Force#Recover one strength, recover from
hoi tam`Realize one's mistake after second thought
hoi tanh`Stinking#gnoble, mean, base
hoi tham`Ask after, inquire affter#sk for, inquire about#People's juror
hoi thanh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Echo
hoi thao`Hold a workshop
hoi thi`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu thi hoi#Examine (pupils...)#Festival of competition
hoi thien`(tu cu; nghia cu) Charity
hoi tho`breath; respiration
hoi thoai`talk, converse
hoi thoi`stinking
hoi ti`(luat) decline judging
hoi tiec`Repent [of], regret
hoi tien`o ask for money
hoi tin`(tu cu; nghia cu) Letter of reply
hoi tinh`to recover to consciousness
hoi to`(luat) Retroactive
hoi toi`Have it in for
hoi trang`(tu cu; nghia cu) Return to one's native country
hoi truoc`In the past
hoi tu`(ly') Converge
hoi tuong`to remember; to recall
hoi uc`Recollect, reminisce
hoi van`Cross-examine, cross-question (for exhaustive information or to embarrass the person)#nhu hoi van (y manh hon)#Palindrome
hoi vien`associate; member
hoi vo`Ask for a girl's hand (from her parents...)
hoi xuan`Undergo the change of life, undergo climacterium, undergo menopause
hoi y`meet and compare notes, have exchange of ideas
hom`Arch, mischievous#Creel's lid#amboo frame (of paper animals...)#eard (on one end of a rice seed)#ibre (of areca-nut)#mall bone (of fish)#utting (of a cassave plant, a mulberry)#Deeply sunken in#Give oneself airs#Sunken in#day#trunk; coffin; casket
hom hem`Wasted, decrepit
hom hinh`nhu hom
hom hom`xem hom (lay)#xem hom (lay)
hom kia`Day before the day before yeaterday, three days ago#Day before yesterday
hom mai`nhu hom som
hom nay`That day (in the future) (clearly definted)#today
hom no`The other day
hom qua`yesterday
hom sau`The following day, the next day
hom som`(cung noi hom mai) Morning and evening
hom xua`One long past day
hon`Add up, balance#ix up#Impertinent, saucy, impudent#Pink (like a new-born baby)#Sulk#esent#ball; piece#more than#Better#soul; spirit; ghost#to kiss
hon am`Benighted
hon bi`marble
hon chien`Engage in a battle royal, engage in a dog-fight
hon dai`testicle
hon dan`Bullet
hon doi`to sulk
hon don`chaotic; confused
hon gian`to be in sulks
hon ha hon hen`xem hon hen (lay)
hon han`By far
hon hao`Impertinent, saucy impudent, cheeky
hon hau`Upright, righteous
hon hen`(Hon hen cuoi) To give a shy smile#Panting
hon hit`Kiss and hug
hon ho`merry; gay; radiant
hon hon`Glowing with pleasure, glowing with happiness#xem hon (lay)
hon hong`(hoa) Amalgam
hon hop`Mix
hon hot`Be glib
hon lao`insolent; impertinent
hon le`Weding
hon loan`Troublous, chaotic
hon mang`Misty (times of the beginnings of man's history)
hon mat`Sulk mildly
hon me`to swoon; to faint; to lose consciousness
hon nguyen`Chaotic.#Thoi dai hon nguyen) Chaos
hon nhan`marriage
hon nhien`natural; unaffected
hon nua`Moreover
hon phach`Soul vital spirit; soul (as opposite to body)
hon phoi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Marry
hon quan`Benighted king
hon quan hon quan`All jumbled up, all of a jumble
hon tap`Mishmash-like, hodge-podge-like, jumbled up
hon the nua`Further, furthermore
hon thiet`pros and cons
hon tho`Poetic inspiration
hon thu`(it dung) Marriage lines#(it dung) nhu hon nhan
hon thua`Win or lose
hon thuc`(sinh hoc) Omnivorous
hon uoc`Marriage pledge. marriage settlement
hon via`nhu hon phach
hon xuoc`Arrogant, overbearing, insolent
hong`Get, take, receive#ait for#Having gaps, gaping, hollow#Intend, aim; expect#it dung) About, nearly#hip; side; flank#pink; rosy#persimmon#throat#to dry#to fail; to miss; to break down; to fail at an examination
hong an`Be deprived of something to eat, not be given to eat#thong tuc) Fail to gain something, suffer losses
hong bach`(thuc) White rose
hong bet`(thong tuc) Utterly unsuccessful, gone to the dogs
hong bi`Wampee (cay)
hong cau`Red Corpuscle, erythrocyte
hong chuyen`Listen with a gaping mouth#egin turning in the direction of the sound of talk, begin to take notice#noi ve tre nho)
hong dao`Rosy; peach-coloured
hong dieu`Scarlet
hong hach`Overbearing, domineering
hong hao`ruddy, pink
hong henh`Full of gaps, widely gaping, exposed
hong hoc`Fail, break down#Throbbing wildly
hong hong`xem hong (lay)#xem hong (lay)
hong huyet cau`nhu hong cau
hong kieu`(thong tuc) Nothing done, nothing achieved, all up with
hong lau`(tu cu; nghia cu) Red pavillion palace (of high-born girls in the feudal times)#ingsong girl's abode, pleasure house
hong mao`Wild goose down
hong mat`to take fresh air
hong may`Have a breakdown
hong ngam`Soaked Japanese persimmon (thus rid of tannin)
hong ngoai`Infra-red
hong nhan`beautiful woman; beautiful girl
hong nhung`(thuc) Velvety rose
hong phuc`great blessing
hong quan`(tu cu; nghia cu; van chuong) Heaven#tu cu; nghia cu) Red army (of the Soviet Union)#(tu cu; nghia cu; van chuong) Red trousers; fair, beautiful girl
hong sac`(Go hong sac) Reddish wood (second-class wood)
hong tam`bull's eye
hong thap tu`red cross
hong thuy`The Deluge, the Flood
hong tran`nhu bui hong
hong tron`Bottomless
hong van`Good luck, good fortune
hong xiem`Sapodila
hong y`nhu hong y giao chu
hong y giao chu`Cardinal
hop`box; can; tin#hollow; sunken#suitable; conformable; consistant#to suit; to fit; to accord#to meet; to gather; to convene#to sip
hop am`accord
hop bang`Confederation
hop bao`(sinh hoc) Plasmodium#Press conference
hop cach`Regular
hop can`(tu cu; nghia cu) Ritual sharing of the bridal cup of wine (on the wedding night)
hop chat`compound
hop dem`Night-club, cabaret
hop doanh`Share a venture, have a joint business
hop dong`contract
hop hanh`Meet, gather (noi khai quat)
hop hien`Constitutional
hop kim`alloy
hop le`Regular, conform to regulations
hop li`reasonable; logical
hop luc`to join forces, to join efforts
hop luu`confluence
hop mat`Get together
hop nhat`Unify, merge
hop phan`Constituent; component
hop phap`legal; lawful
hop phap hoa`Legalize
hop quan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Band together
hop so`(co hoc; co khi') Gear-box#Cranium, skull
hop tac`Co-operate, collaborate
hop tac hoa`Organize into co-opertatives
hop tac xa`co-operative
hop thien`(Hoi hop thien) (tu cu; nghia cu) Charity [society]
hop thoi`Fashionable#imely, opportune
hop thu`post-office box
hop thuc`nhu hop cach
hop thuc hoa`to regularize
hop tuyen`Anthology
hop xuong`Sing in chorus, chorus
hop y`Meet one's desire, fulfil one's wish#ully agree in everything
hot`(of bird) to sing#of bird) to twitter#Ivory (bone) tablet (hold by mandarins when in formal dress)#e frightened#coop up (with one's hands)#b) Coin (money)#tieng dia phuong) nhu hot#seed#to cut; to clip; to crop; to shear
hot com`Wart
hot hai`Panic, be panic-stricken#Hot ho hot hai(lay, y tang)
hot hoang`to be frightened out of one's wits
hot leo`Tell tales ingratiatingly
hot ngon`Steal an early march on someone and get a frofit
hot nhien`All of a sudden
hot thuoc`(tieng dia phuong) make up a prescription (by a herbalist).#tu cu; nghia cu) Earn one's living as herbalist
hot xoai`Chance (kind of venereal disease)
hot xoan`(tieng dia phuong) Diamond
hu`(denoting discontent). Hell!#Damn it!#Old-fashioned and narrow-minded#Wood owl#corrupt; decayed; rotten; spoiled#vain; false; unreal#jar#nhu ho#to hot; to sound#to howl
hu ao`Unreal, illusory
hu bai`Corrupt, degenerate
hu cau`Invent, imagine (a work of fiction...)#ictitious, fictive
hu danh`vainglory
hu doi`Useless to society.#ne thinks a drunk one is useless to society
hu don`Turn bad in character (noi ve tre em)
hu hai`damaged
hu hao`Suffer some damage and loss
hu hen`Shamelessly base
hu hi`to amuse, to enjoy oneself
hu hoa`(it dung) Degenerate#ommit adultery#At (by) haphazard, by mere chance, casually
hu hon`Call back to consciousness
hu hong`nhu hu (noi khai quat)
hu hu`(Khoc hu hu) To weep noisily#(Ren hu hu) To groan
hu khong`empty; nil; vain
hu lau`Fogyish
hu nho`Old-fashioned and narrow-minded scholar
hu phi`Waste
hu so`(toan) Abstract number
hu than`spoiled, bad-mannered
hu tieu`Noodle with seasoned and saute' beef (served hot and with other ingredients)
hu tim`Hide-and-seek
hu truong`Show off, display (something essentially empty)
hu truyen`Legendary
hu tu`Formal word (as opposite to notional word)
hu tuc`depraved customs
hu van`Impractical literature, empty literature, high sounding literature#mpractical rites, impractical rituals
hu vi`Nominal position
hu via`What a close shave!
hu vinh`illusory glogy, emptyhonour
hu vo`nil; nothingness; nihility
hua`to allow#to promise; to engage
hua hen`to promise
hua hon`to engage, to betroth
huan chuong`medal; decoration
huan dao`(tu cu; nghia cu) District education officer
huan du`(tu cu; nghia cu) Instruct, give teachings
huan lenh`Instructions, directions
huan luyen`to train; to teach; to drill; to coach
huan luyen vien`Coach, instructor, trainer
huan thi`Give teachings, give recommendations (one some subject)
huan tu`(tu cu; nghia cu) Teaching, recommen-dation (of a superior at the opening of a conference)
huan tuoc`Lord
huc`(Huc dau vao) To addict oneself to, to addict one's mind to#Scorching [hot]#oiling, seething#to butt; to collide; to run into
huc hac`Be at daggers drawn, be at cross purposes
hue`(tieng dia phuong) Draw#lily#tieng dia phuong) Flower, blossom, bloom
hue co`(tu cu; nghia cu) Condescend to
huech`Gaping
huech hoac`nhu huech (y manh hon)
huenh hoang`Brag
hui`Cut (one's hair)#leprous
hum`(van chuong) Tiger#Mouthful, sip#Puddle
hum beo`Tiger and fanther; ferocious animals (noi khai quat).#b) Cruel and wicked people
hum hup`xem hup (lay)
hun`to club together; to contribute to common stock#to fumigate; to smoke out
hun duc`to temper
hun hoan`(it dung) Quite [short]
hun hut`xem hut (lay)
hung`(of hair) reddish#(thuong mia) Talented, superman-like#Basil#Break, begin to shine#Hung hung (lay, y giam)#Pleasure and enthusiasm, uplifting feeling; inspiration#inspiration#to catch a falling object
hung ac`cruel, ferocious, bnetal
hung bao`Atrocious, violent
hung bien`eloquent
hung binh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Raise an army, raise troops
hung chi`(it dung) nhu khoai chi
hung cu`Occupy and rule over unchalleged (an area)
hung cuong`powerful; strong
hung do`Thug; hooligan
hung du`ferocious, fierce; cruel
hung dung`Brave and brawny, bold and vigorous, martial
hung han`nhu hung ac
hung hang`Have a slight and sporadic cough, have a dry cough#Reckless, overbold
hung hau`Large and powerful mighty
hung ho`Truculent, violent#nhu ho hung
hung hoang`Realgar
hung hon`Eloquent, forceful
hung huc`Be absorbed in (one's work)#xem huc
hung hung`xem hung (lay)#xem hung (lay)
hung khi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Strong impetus
hung khoi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Feel fired, feel enthusiastic
hung liu`Flavouring powder (consisting of five ingredients including cinnamon, seed of anise-tree and seed of sweet basil)
hung pham`murderer
hung phan`to excite
hung phe`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu hung vong
hung tai`Great talent, great skill
hung tan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Temporary burial#Cruel, brutal
hung than`evil genius
hung thinh`prosperous
hung thu`(cung noi hung pham) Murderer, killer, assassin#interest; pleasant; amenity
hung tin`ad news
hung tinh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Unlucky star.#tu cu; nghia cu) Tyrannical mandarin#aroused
hung ton`violent, cruel
hung trang`strong; mighty; grand; grandiore
hung vi`imposing
hung vuong`(it dung) nhu hung thinh
huom`nhu guom
huong`Much less#incense#perfume; fragrancy#nhu hong#to enjoy; to taste; to inherit#way; direction
huong am`(tu cu; nghia cu) Post-worship feast (o nong thon ngay xua)
huong an`Incense-table (placed in front of the altar)
huong chi`nhu huong
huong chinh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Village administrative business
huong chuc`(tu cu; nghia cu) Villag official (thoi thuoc phap)
huong cong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Interprovincial competition-examination (truoc
huong dan`to lead; to guide; to conduct
huong dan vien`Guide#oach
huong dang`(tu cu; nghia cu) Worship
huong dao`(it dung) Guide, show the way 
huong dao sinh`Boy scout 
huong dong`(thuc) tropism
huong dung`(tu cu; nghia cu) Regional (thoi thuoc phap)
huong duong`Sunflower, turnsole
huong ho`nhu huong
huong hoa`Cult-portion of heritage entail#Joss-sticks and flowers (offerings to deities when worshipping them)
huong lac`Hedonistic#Chu nghia huong lac) Hedonism
huong lan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Country neighbour
huong lao`(tu cu; nghia cu) Village elders
huong lieu`spice; condiment
huong lua`conjugal-love, conjugal-bliss
huong nga`(tam) Introversive
huong nghiep`Vocational guidance
huong nhu`holy basil
huong quan`(tu cu; nghia cu) Native land, home village
huong sen`Lotus seed-pod. watering-can rose, shower-rose
huong su`(tu cu; nghia cu) village headmaster (thoi thuoc phap)
huong tam`Centripetal
huong thi`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu thi huong
huong thien`nclined to the good
huong tho`Live to be
huong thom`scent, perfume, fragrance
huong thon`countryside, villages, villages and hamlets
huong thu`Come into, come in for#ome in for a share of society's products receive one share of society's products
huong troi`(van chuong,tu cu; nghia cu) Beautiful woman; beauty
huong tuc`Village custom
huong ung`to echo; to respond; to answer
huong uoc`Village regulation, village convention
huong vi`aromatic flavour; taste
huong vong`Incense-coil
huou`stag
huou cao co`Giraffe
huou sao`Japanese deer, spotted deer
hup`to dive under the water#to drink (song.)
hup lan`Dive
hut`short; deficent#to suiss#to inhale; to suck (air; smoke) to absord; to take up (water) to attract
hut bui`(May hut bui) Vacuum cleaner
hut mau`Bleed white, be a blood-sucker to
hut xach`Smoke opium, be an opium addict (noi khai quat)
huu`right
huu ai`Long huu ai#raternity, affection between friends
huu binh`(tu cu; nghia cu) Cease-fire
huu bong`Pension, retirement pension
huu canh`Fallow
huu chien`to truce
huu co`organic
huu duc`(tu cu; nghia cu) right wing, right flank. (of an army)
huu dung`useful; serviceable
huu han`limited
huu hao`(tu cu; nghia cu) friendly
huu hieu`Effective
huu hinh`Having a visible form, visible, tangible
huu ich`useful
huu khuynh`Rightist deviationistic
huu ngan`Righr bank (of a river)
huu nghi`Friendly
huu non`Retire before one's time 
huu quan`Concerned
huu san`Propertied, moneyed, belonging to the haves
huu tham`(Ky huu tham) Vacation
huu thanh`(ngon ngu hoc) Voiced
huu tinh`(sinh hoc) Sexual#charming
huu trach`(it dung) responsable#Nha huu trach) The authorities
huu tri`to retire on a pension
huu y`intentional, wilful
huy`(tu cu; nghia cu) Forbidden name, tabooed name#to destroy; to cancel; to reverse
huy bo`to to cancel, to void
huy chuong`medal
huy diet`to destroy completely
huy dong`to mobilize
huy hieu`badge; insignia
huy hoai`to main, to ruin
huy hoang`splendid, resplendent
huy nhat`(it dung) Death anniversary day
huych`Thud, whack, thwack#Huynh huych (cung noi huych huych) (lay, y lien tiep)#nhu hich
huyen`(tu cu; nghia cu; van chuong) huyen duong (nt).#district#false#jet
huyen ao`illusory, visionnary, fanciful, subtil
huyen bi`occult; hidden; mysterious
huyen chuc`(tu cu; nghia cu) Relieve of one's function
huyen de`Dew-claw
huyen dieu`marvellous; mysterious
huyen doan`District Youth Union(communist)
huyen doi`District armed forces(communist)
huyen duong`(tu cu; nghia cu) District chief's yamen#(tu cu; nghia cu; van chuong) Mother
huyen ho`Fabulous
huyen hoac`Fantastic, fabulous#deluding; deceiving
huyen nao`noisy; loud; clamorous
huyen phu`(ly') Suspension
huyen sam`(thuc vat, duoc) Fig-wort
huyen thien`(cung noi huyen thuyen) Talk nineteen to the dozen, palaver
huyen thoai`Legend, myth
huyen truyen`Spread [fasle news]
huyen uy`District (communist) party commitee
huyen vi`Mysterious, marvellous
huyet`blood#crypt#cave; den; grave
huyet ap`blood pressure
huyet ap ke`Sphymomanometer
huyet bach`leucorhoea
huyet cau`blood globules
huyet cau to`Oxyhaemoglobin
huyet chien`Bloody battle
huyet du`cordyline
huyet hoc`Hematology
huyet le`blood and tear; excruciating pain, agony
huyet mach`Blood-vessel#reath of life, breath of nostrils; life-line#lood line, line of descent
huyet quan`blood-vessel
huyet su`(tu cu; nghia cu) Bloody history; history written in blood
huyet thanh`Serum
huyet thong`Blood line, blood-relationship
huyet thu`Letter written in blood, very moving letter
huyet tuong`Plasma
huynh`(van chuong) Fire-fly, glow-worm.#ear the wall, there flickered fire-flies#Stonewood (cay)#elder brother
huynh de`brothers
huynh huych`xem huych (lay)
huynh ong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Venerable brother
huynh quang`flourescence
huynh truong`(trtr) Senior#rown-up (in relation to children)
huyt`whistle
huyt gio`(cung noi huyt sao) Whistle
huyt sao`xem huyt gio
hy hoa`artoon; caricature
hy huu`are; seldom
hy sinh`o sacrifice; to give up
hy vong`o hope; to expect and desire
i`(long) to go to stool#to be inert; to sluggish
i a i ach`xem i ach (lay)
i a i oi`xem i oi
i ach`ploddingly
i am`Rumble
i eo`Complan; nag
i oi`Call each other (one another). noisily
i to`first lesson
ia`to go stool; to defecate
ia chay`Have diarrhoea
ia dai`Make a mess
ia vao`(thong tuc) Not care a damn about
ich`Thud#Chug#inh ich (lay, y lien tiep) #co ich useful
ich dung`(it dung) Useful
ich ky`elfish, sel-seeking
ich loi`usefulness, henefit
ich mau`Motherwort (cay)
im`calm; silent; quiet,#to hush up; to bruke
im a`Calm, quiet
im ang`nhu im a
im bat`Stop crying abruptly
im im`Silent
im lang`tinh tu, dong tu, danh tu silent, sitence ; to silence
im lim`quiet, dormart
im mom`Shut your mouth! Cut your cackle! shut up!
im phang phac`ead silence; flat calm
in`to print; to strike off
in het`[Be] As like as two peas, [be] Cast in the same mould
in it`xem it (lay)#xem it (lay)
in may`typography
in tay`Make finger-prints
in thach ban`(tu cu; nghia cu) nhu in lito
in thu`(Ban in thu) Slip
inh`o swell
inh bung`Swell, bulge#thong tuc) Be big with child
inh ich`xem ich (lay)
inh oi`noisy; loud; tumultuous
inh tai`deafening
it`Grunt, oink (my)#in it (lay, y lien tiep)#little; few
it bua`A few days
it co`rare, scarce
it hon`less; least; fewer
it khi`seldom; earely
it lau`For a little while
it lau nay`lately
it loi`Of few words
it nhat`At least
it nhieu`a little
it nhut`t least
it noi`telling little; close-mouthed
it nua`at least
it oi`nhu it oi#very little
it ra`nhu it nhat
it tuoi`Still young
iu`doughy; soggy
iu xiu`nhu iu
ka ki`haki
ka li`otassium
ke`(tieng dia phuong) Fan-palm#tone embankment#(tieng dia phuong) nhu ghe#close to; near to#crevice#quay; duck#scheme; stratagem#shelf#to chock; to prop#(Bot) millet#to contribute money toward a small share to squeere in#to line; to draw#man; person; individual#to tell; to relate
ke ca`Dawdle#Self-styled superior#lder, senior.
ke can`Surrounding, adjacent
ke cap`thief
ke chan`Take over someone's job#eplace somebody, succeed someone
ke chi`Take no notice of, have no regard for
ke cho`Capital, urban area
ke cuop`robber, brigand
ke cuu`Carry out research on
ke den`Immediately after, after that 
ke gian`Evidoer (a thief, a burglar, a spy, etc...)
ke giao`Sodomy
ke gio`Somebody
ke ho`split; slit; aperture
ke hoach`to plan; to design
ke hoach hoa`Plan
ke hoach hoa gia dinh`Family planning
ke ke`Carry always
ke khai`to enumerate; to make up a list
ke kho`Pauper, the poor (noi khai quat)#eggar
ke le`Spin a long yarn, tell in a lengthy way, tell a shaggy-dog story (my)
ke mau`nhu me ke
ke nach`Next door
ke ne`(tieng dia phuong) nhu rut re
ke nghiep`Follow in one's father's footsteps, continue one's father's work, take over, succeed
ke nhe`Have a drunken drawl (in one's voice)#ester, plague
ke nut`Crack, fissure
ke ra`In reality, in fact, to be fair
ke sach`(tu cu; nghia cu) Expedient
ke tap`Succeed (to a title)
ke that`nhu vo ke
ke thu`Enemy
ke thua`to inherit
ke tiep`to succeed, to follow
ke toan`accountancy
ke toan vien`Accountant, book-keeper
ke toi`Tell of someone's mistakes, expose someone's mistakes
ke tren`Above-mentioned, above-said, above
ke trom`thief; burglar
ke truyen`(it dung) Hand over from one generation to another
ke tu`As from
ke tuc`to continue
ke vi`to succeed the throne ; to take over
ke xac`nhu ke thay
kec`Lovebird
kech`(nhu cach) (Kech den gia) To give up for all the rest of one's life#oarse#Bulging
kech com`Misfitted#udicrous
kech xu`Colossal, bulky
kem`cream; ice-cream#less#parrot#pincers#zinc
kem canh`Be treated as second fiddle
kem cap`nhu kem
kem coi`Weak,
kem gai`arbed wire
kem hen`Inferior, lower (in position, talent...)
kem nhem`xem nhem
kem ve`nhu kem canh
ken`Nickel#thong tuc) Crack, swell#Stingy, close-fisted#top, fill, caulk#cocoon; follicle#to choose; to select#to escort; to accompany
ken chon`nhu ken
ken cua`Envy (someone) from the smallest thing
ken hat`(tieng dia phuong) (nhu may hat) Gramophone
ken hieu`Clarion
ken ken`Vulture#vulture
ken ket`xem ket (lay)#xem ket (lay)
ken lenh`Fanfare
ken trong`Clarinet and drum (used in a funeral procession)
ken tui`Bagpipe
keng`Clang#keng keng (lay, y lien tiep)#smart
keng keng`xem keng (lay)
kenh`(tieng dia phuong) Tiger#Swell cumbrously#Kenh kenh (lay, y giam)#canal#to live flat
kenh cang`Bulky, cumbrous, lying in the way#e stiff with itch-mites
kenh kenh`xem kenh (lay)
kenh kieu`Put on airs, give oneself airs, behave superciliously
keo`If not, or else, otherwise#candy; sweet; sweetmeat#glue#horn#scissors#to pull; to tug; to strain
keo ban`stingy
keo banh`Sweets, confections
keo be`to form a party
keo bo`Foot a long distance
keo cang`Extensive
keo canh`nhu keo be
keo cay`Pull (haul) a plough#oil and moil, work hard
keo co`(cung noi keo neo) Importune #with bargaining)#Hoist a flag#tug of war, to drag on
keo cu`nhu keo kiet
keo cua`to drag on
keo dai`to stretch; to lengthen; to drag on
keo go`Snore
keo keo`Plaguy
keo ket`nhu ket
keo kiet`stingy; miserly
keo le`to drag
keo luoi`o draw up a net
keo ma`nhu keo
keo mut`Preserves, confections
keo neo`nhu keo co
keo nua`If not as a result, if not eventually
keo roi`nhu keo nua
keo son`Very fast
keo theo`Bring about
kep`(cu) Actor, singsong girl's accompanist#Crepe (thin fabric with a wrinkled surface)#repe rubber,crepe#clip; clamp clamp
kep hat`Actor, dramatic actor
kep toc`hair-pin
ket`Plait, tie in knots#lot, mat#ass (a verdict), Pronounce (a sentence)#onclude, wind up#Screech, gnashing (grinding) sound#to nip; to catch; to pinch; to stick
ket an`to convict; to condemn; to sentence
ket ban`Make friends#ecome man and wife
ket be`Gang together
ket cau`Composition, structure, structuring
ket cuoc`(tieng dia phuong) nhu ket cuc
ket dinh`Adhesive
ket doan`Gather into a friendship with
ket duyen`to join in wedlock
ket giao`to strike up a friendship
ket hon`to get married
ket hop`to combine, to cordinate
ket lieu`Conclude, put an end to
ket luan`to conclude; to end
ket mac`Conjunctiva#y) Conjunctivitis
ket nap`to admit to
ket nghia`Swear brotherhood, Swear
ket oan`Engender a feud, give rise to resentment
ket qua`result; effect
ket than`Unite by marriage, ally
ket thuc`to end ; to bring,come to end
ket tinh`Crystallize
ket toan`Draw the final balance-sheet (at the end of the financial year) make up accounts
ket toi`Pass a verdict; condemn
ket tua`(hoa hoc) Precipitate
keu`Get with a pole (with a long stick)#Cao keu) Lanky#to call; to cry
keu ca`Complain, moan
keu cau`Pray for help from higher levels
keu cuu`Cry for help
keu gao`Cry out one's opposition, cry out#cream
keu goi`to appeal to, to call upon
keu la`to cry out, to seream
keu nai`to beseech; to entreat
keu oan`to claim innocence
keu reu`Lament, bewail
keu troi`Implore, God, entreat God
keu van`Cry mercy
keu vang`o clang
kha`Sigh of satisfaction#ronical snort#rather; fairy; enough; passably
kha ai`loveable; likeable; nice
kha bien`Variable
kha di`Possible
kha gia`to be well off
kha kha`enough#xem kha (lay)
kha khen`(cu) Praiseworthy
kha kinh`(it dung) Respectable, estimable, venerable
kha nang`abilily; capablity; competence
kha nghi`suspicious
kha o`detestable
kha quan`good; satisfactory
kha thi`easable, realizable
kha thu`(it dung) Acceptable
kha tot`assable good
khac`nick; notch#other; another; further; otherwise#to carve; to engrave#quarter of an hour#to spit; to hawk
khac biet`Different (in some respects)
khac chi`nhu khac gi
khac dong`Copper-engraving
khac gi`just like
khac go`Wood-engraving
khac kho`harsh; austere
khac khoai`worried; anxious
khac khu`A bit under the weather
khac nao`nhu khac gi
khac nghiet`Harsh
khac nho`Hawk and spit
khac nung`Pyrography
khac phuc`Overcome, surmount, make good
khac sau`Engrave (in one's mind)
khac thuong`especial; extraordinary
khac xa`quite; far different
khach`guest; caller; vistor
khach dia`(van chuong, cu) Foreign land
khach hang`customer; patron; client
khach khi`Ceremonious
khach khua`guests and visitors
khach moi`Guest
khach quan`objective
khach san`hotel
khach sao`ceremonious; formal
khach the`Object
khach tinh`Unlike intimate friends
khai`(dia phuong) Tiger#oo proud to accept other's help#to declare
khai bao`to inform to (authorities); to confess to
khai but`to begin a new-year writing
khai ca`Triumphal hymn, paean
khai can`(toan) Extract the root (of a number)
khai chien`Declare war
khai giang`Begin a new term (after the summer holifdays)
khai hoa`Bloom flower#e delivered (of a baby)#to civilize#to open fire
khai hoan`triumphal return
khai hoan ca`song of triumph, paean
khai hoan mon`Triumphal arch
khai hoang`Reclain waste land, reclain virgin soil
khai hoi`(cu) Meet for discussion
khai huyet`Cough up blood#Dig the grave
khai khan`Break fresh ground
khai khau`(xau) Open one's mouth (and speak)
khai khoang`Mine ores
khai luan`Outline 
khai mac`(cu) Raise curtain#pen
khai mao`Begin, start, open
khai mo`Mine
khai niem`notion; conception
khai quat`o generalize
khai quat hoa`Generalize
khai sang`Found
khai sanh`to notify a birth
khai sinh`Register the birth (of a newborn baby)#ather, found
khai son`To develop, to utilize the highland or the difficult region
khai tam`Begin teaching the alphabet#(nghia bong) Initiate
khai thac`to exploit; to develope
khai thong`Clear,free (something) of obstruction
khai trien`Develop
khai tru`to expel; to exclude
khai truong`Begin a new school year#to open a shop
khai tu`to notify a death
khai vi`Act as aperitif
khai xuan`(cu) Begin the sping round of pleasures
kham`Nasty#ill-smelling#laden; loaded#to bear; to endure#to encrust; to inlay; to enchase#to search; to examine; to conduct a search#prison; jail; gaol
kham benh`Examine
kham duong`(cu) nhu kham
kham kha`Be better off
kham kham`xem kham (lay)
kham kho`hard; austere
kham liem`to enshroud
kham mang`Act as the king's envoy#ing's envoy#e'gate
kham nghiem`to examine
kham nha`Search someone' house
kham pha`to discover; to find out
kham phuc`to admire
kham sai`King's special envoy
kham su`(cu) French Resident Superior (in Central Vietnam)
kham thien giam`(lich su) The astronomical service
kham xet`to search
khan`Having a very offensive smell.#Khan khan) (lay, y giam)#Hoarse#Reclain (waste land)#Set of three same cards#aucous#Being at a loose end (xem nam khan)#husky; raucous; hoarse#stunted#to pray#to see; to look#towel
khan ban`Table-cloth, table-cover
khan cap`urgent; pressing
khan cau`Entreat
khan choang`Shawl
khan co`Hoarse
khan dai`stand; grand stand
khan gia`spectator; audience
khan goi`Lagre handkerchief (to make a bundle of clothes, etc. with)
khan hiem`scarcie; rare
khan hoang`Break fresh ground
khan khan`xem khan (lay)#xem khan (lay)
khan khoan`Entreat persistenly
khan lau`Wiping cloth
khan mat`Towel
khan mo qua`Kerchief (to be tired in a triangle on the forehead)
khan nai`Implore somebody's forgiveness
khan ngang`Mourning head-band
khan quang`Scraf, muffler
khan tay`Handkerchief
khan thiet`Very urgent, very pressing
khan tieng`Hoarse-voiced
khan tinh`Grumpy and liked by few people
khan truong`tense
khan vai`Kowtow and pray under one's breath
khan yeu`Urgent and important
khang`(dia phuong) Sealing-wax#cat#to resist; to protest
khang an`(trang trong) In security and good health, safe and sound#to appeal to
khang cao`(cu) nhu chong an Appeal (to a higher court)
khang chien`To resist (against foreign aggression), to carry out a war of resistance
khang cu`Resist, offer resistance
khang cuong`(cu) In good wealth, well
khang dinh`affirm; to assert
khang doc`Antitoxic
khang doc to`(y hoc) Antitoxin
khang khac`xem khac (lay)
khang khai`brave; chivalrous#nhu khang khai
khang khang`Persist in#xem khang (lay)
khang kheo`nhu khang khiu
khang khit`to be attached; devoted to
khang khiu`Skinny, scrawny, scraggy, scrubby
khang khuan`(y hoc) Antibacterian
khang kien`nhu khang cuong
khang nang`(it dung) (Di khang nang) Walk with bow-legged gait
khang nghi`Protest against (some resolution)
khang nguyen`(sinh hoc) Antigen
khang sinh`antibiotic
khang the`(sinh hoc) Antibody
khang trang`vast; spacious
khang tu`(vat ly) Coercive
khanh`(cu) Our favourite subject (used by a king when addressing the qeen or a royal concubine or a mandarin)#Dainty, finical (about one's food)#musical stone
khanh an`nhu khanh
khanh chuc`congratulate, to wish well
khanh ha`Hold great rejoicings
khanh khach`Pealing (laughter)
khanh kiet`all spent; exhausted; quite use up
khanh tan`nhu khanh kiet
khanh thanh`to inaugurate; to open for public use
khanh tiet`festival, festivities
khanh tuong`High-ranking civil and military court offcials
khao`Spill someome's private (still secret) stories#to feast; to give a feast#to torture; to extort
khao binh`(cu) Give a feast to one's troops
khao chung`Check evidence
khao co`to study antiquities
khao co hoc`Archaeology
khao cua`Extort money
khao cuu`to study; to carry out scientific research
khao dinh`(it dung) Revise
khao hach`to test
khao khat`to thirst for; to crave for; to long for
khao nghiem`Test, experiment
khao quan`(cu) Examiner#nhu khao binh
khao sat`to investigate
khao thi`Give an take examinations (noi khai quat)
khao thuong`Give a feast as reward, reward with a feast
khao tra`Investigate
khao van`Question closely (cadidaties)
khap`Join, fit, mortise#all over#large glazed earthenware jar
khap kha khap khenh`xem khap khenh (lay)
khap kha khap khieng`xem khap khieng (lay)
khap khenh`Uneven, bumpy#Khap kha khap khenh) (lay, y tang)
khap khieng`Limping#Khap kha khap khieng) (lay, y tang)
khap khoi`(Feel) elated, (be) in high spirits
khat`thirsty#to ask for a delay
khat kha khat khu`xem khat khu
khat khao`nhu khao khat
khat khe`austere; stern
khat khu`nhu khac khu
khat lan`Keep on putting off (paying a debt)
khat mau`bloodthirsty
khat no`to ask for a delay to pay one's debts
khat nuoc`Bent on recovering one's heavy losses (ddamh bac)
khat si`Mendicant bonze
khat sua`Thirsty for milk (of a baby)
khat thuc`(cu) Beg for food
khat vong`to aspire; to thirst for
khau`(dia phuong) nhu gau Bailer, bucket#mouth#pretty#to deduct#to sew
khau cai`palate
khau chan`Quilt
khau cung`oral deposition
khau dau`to knowtow
khau do`aperture
khau doi`(Anti-aircraft) battery
khau duoi`Pork cut at joint of tail#rupper
khau hao`to amortize, to give discount to
khau hieu`slogan; password
khau khi`(cu) One's character (as shown by one's way of speaking)
khau khinh`nhu khau
khau lenh`Password
khau luoc`Tack, baste
khau ngu`Conversational language, informal language
khau phan`ration
khau tai`(it dung) repartee
khau tay`Sew by hand-sew
khau trang`auze mask
khau tru`to abate; to deduct
khau truyen`Hand down orally, transmit by oral tradition
khau va`Sew (noi khai quat)
khau vat`Whip-stitch
khau vi`taste, appetite
khay`(dia phuong) nhu gay #Hint, tease#In cynical manner#tray
khay den`Opium-tray, opium-set
khe`Dirty (yellow)#Strike#carambola#contract; greement#gently; softly#slit; chink; interstice#to be burnt
khe co`Have one's throat contracted by too much sweetness
khe kha`Have a drunken drawl
khe khang`Lightly, softly, gently
khe khat`austere; severe
khe khe`xem khe (lay)#xem khe (lay)
khe ne`Lumber (under the weight of a heavy load), struggle with a heavy thing
khe uoc`Contract
khec`monkey (tieng mac nhiec)
khem`Keep a post-natal diet (with abstinence from some kinds of food believed to be unsuitable to women just out of childbirth)
khen`Pan-pipe#to congratulate; to praise
khen ngoi`to command, to praise
khen thuong`Commend and reward
khenh`Carry with one's hands, move by hand#Protruding#ounging, sprawling#nhu khenh
khenh khang`slowly
kheo`Ham (back part of the leg behind the knee-joint)#clever; skilful; dexterous
kheo khi`You naughty (loi mang yeu)
kheo khu`Thin and weak
kheo leo`nhu kheo (noi khai quat)
kheo noi`Be good talker
kheo tay`Be skilful with one's hands, be light-fingered, be dextrous.#Kheo chan kheo tay) nhu kheo tay
kheo xoay`Have gumption; be resourceful
khep`to close; to shut
khep kin`Closed, self-contained
khep nep`Stooping timidly, cringing
khet`to smell; to be burnt
khet let`xem let.#Khet len let) (lay, y tang)
khet tieng`Widely notorious
kheu`to raise; to extract#to tease
kheu gan`Irritate, vex
kheu goi`sex-appeal; sexy
khi`Uconscious, quite#khi khi) (lay, y tang)#case; time#when; while#to slight; to despise#gas#semon; sperm enough; a little; a bit#monkey
khi ap`Amospheric pressure
khi ap ke`Barometer
khi bam`Innate character, inborn character, natural disposition
khi cau`balloon; air-ship
khi chat`disposition
khi cong`(the thao) Respiratory training
khi cot`gait, carriage, figure
khi cu`tool; untensil; instrument
khi dong`pneumatic
khi dong hoc`aerodynamics
khi dot`(cung noi) khi doc Gorilla
khi gia`Old monkey! (tieng rua cua nguoi co tuoi)
khi gio`How naughty! (tieng rua mot cach than mat)#nhu khi gio
khi gioi`arms; weapon
khi hau`Climate#Vietnam is located in the tropical and temperate zone. It is characterized by a strong monsoon influence, a considerable amount of sunny days, and with a high rate of rainfall and humidity. Some places located near the tropics or in mountainous regions are endowed with a temperate climate Average temperatures for the year range from 22o to 27oC. The climate in Vietnam is divided into two distinguished seasons: The cold season (from November to April) and the hot season (from May to October). The most noticeable seasonal changes in temperature are found in the northern provinces, where a difference of 12 degrees Celsius is possible. The difference in temperature, estimated at 3 degrees Celsius, between the two seasons in southern Vietnam is almost unnoticeable. Four distinct seasons are most evident in the northern provinces
khi hau hoc`climatology
khi hiem`Rare gas
khi hoa`Gasify
khi hu`(cung noi) huyet bach Leucorrhoea
khi huyet`Blood, vitality#ine of descent, ancestry
khi khai`Proud, unwilling to accept a favour from anyone
khi khi`xem khi (lay)
khi khong`By chance, by accident
khi khu`(van chuong) Uneven, bumpy
khi luc`vital force; vitality
khi man`(cu) Slight
khi nao`When#ever
khi nen`When fortune smiles upon you, when you are favoured by fortune
khi nhac`Instrumental music
khi no`Explosive gas
khi phach`sence of perposes and uprightness, stuff, stamp
khi quan`Organ#Slight the king#windpipe, trachea
khi quyen`atmosphere
khi sac`Mien, complexion
khi sinh`Aerial
khi tai`Material, equipment
khi the`Impetus, momentum
khi tiet`Sense of purpose and uprightness
khi tinh hoc`Aerostatics
khi tra`(it dung) Be in the habit of lying, be a liar
khi tro`Inert gas
khi troi`Air, atmosphere
khi truoc`formerly; before
khi tuong`meteor
khi tuong hoc`Meteorology
khi vat`Cast-offthing, cast-off, waste
khi vi`Flavour, taste (of a dish)
khia`angle
khia canh`Angle
khich`Provoke
khich bac`Vex, nettle
khich dong`o excite
khich le`to encourage; to foster
khiem`Unassuming
khiem dien`absent
khiem khuyet`Shortcoming
khiem nha`impolite; uncivil
khiem nhuong`Unassuming, self-effacing#humble; modest
khiem ton`Modest
khien`(thong tuc) Chide, scold#Shield (used in the old times against spears, arrows...)#to bid; to order
khien cuong`Foreced
khien muon`(cu) Dispel one's sorrow
khien trach`to blame; to reprimand; to chide
khieng`Limp#to carry
khieng vac`Carry on one's shoulders (on one's back)
khiep`to fear; to dread; to be afraid
khiep dam`Be frightened to death
khiep nhuoc`cowardly
khiep so`be horrified, be terrified
khieu`gift; talent; instinct
khieu chien`Provoke a war, stage war provocations.#thong tuc)Pick a quarrel
khieu dam`sexual stimulate; sexy
khieu khich`to provoke; to arouse
khieu nai`to complain
khieu oan`Request attention of the authorities to an injusttice, claim one's innocence
khieu to`to lodge a complaint
khieu vu`to dance
khin khit`xem khit (lay)#xem khit (lay)
khinh`to scorn; to disdain; to despise
khinh bac`thoughtless
khinh bi`to slight
khinh binh`Light infantry
khinh de`Feel contempt for, scorn
khinh ham`Vedette-boat
khinh khi`hydrogen#nhu khinh de
khinh khi cau`balloon, airship
khinh khinh`(look) disdainful, (look) supercilious
khinh man`Be proud and impertiment toward one's superiors
khinh miet`Think little and scorn
khinh nhon`Show disrespect
khinh re`nhu khinh de
khinh suat`Hare-brained, rash
khinh tai`Despise wealth, despise riches
khinh thi`Despise, think very little of
khinh thuong`to despise; to feel contempt for
khinh trong`Light or heavy, inportant or not
khit`Sniff#Khin khit) (lay, y lien tiep)#close; tight
khit khao`Well-jointed
khit khit`Close-fitting
khiu`Stich summarily
kho`Pretty well, quite enough.#Kho kho) (lay, y giam)#dry; dried#hard; difficult; delicate#loin-cloth#store; warehouse; depository; depot#to cook with brine#unhappy; miserable#width; size#unwise; credulous
kho bac`Treasury
kho bao`Headstrong, self-illed
kho bau`Treasure
kho can`Arid, Barren (noi ve dat) #Dried up, affectedby drought
kho chiu`unendureable; painful
kho choi`Hard to deal with
kho chu`(cu) Victim (of a calamity..)
kho coi`unsightly
kho cong`Take great pains, work hard 
kho cuc`nhu cuc kho
kho dai`Naive and foolish, stupid
kho de`(cung noi) lam kho de Make difficulties, raise difficulties (when someone needs one's help)
kho det`Shrivelled up#hin as a wafer
kho dich`vorvee, piece of hard labour
kho do`Native soldier(thoi cuoc phap)
kho doc`Hard to recite, tomguetwisting (noi ve cau tho) 
kho hanh`ascetic, austere
kho heo`to fade; to wilt; to wither
kho hieu`Hard to understand
kho hinh`torture
kho hoc`Study hard, study in reduced circumstances, work one's way through#school,college, university ...)
kho khan`Dry#hard, difficult
kho khao`Dry#Naive
kho khe`Wheeze
kho khinh`nhu kho
kho kho`Monotonous snores#xem kho#xem kho (lay)
kho khoc`Very dry 
kho khuay`Inconsolable
kho long`improbable
kho luc`(cu) Native guard (of yamens). (thoi cuoc phap)
kho luyen`train hard
kho muc`ried cuttlefish
kho nao`agonizing, in anguish
kho nghe`Hard to understand, nearly unitelligible, hardly intelligble#npalatable, unacceptable
kho nghi`be at a loss
kho ngui`(thong tuc) Very unseembly
kho nha`(thong tuc) Hard to do
kho nhan`(thong tuc) nhu kho nha
kho nhoc`hard; laborious; painful
kho nhuc`Of the nature of indignities, causing pain and humiliation, excruciatingly humiliating
kho noi`Not to known what to say#elf-illed, headstrong#nhu khon noi
kho nuot`Hard to eat#thong tuc) Hard to do
kho sai`hard labour; penal servitude
kho so`miserable, unhappy
kho tam`broken-hearted; crushed by grief
kho tang`treasure
kho than`Self-tormenting
kho tho`Oppressive
kho thuong`Detestable
kho tin`Incredible
kho tinh`Fastidious, hard to please, cross-grained
kho troi`No plain sailing, not smoothly going
kho vai`Breadth of shoulders
kho vang`(cu) Native royal guard (thoi thuoc phap).
kho xu`Awkward
kho?`(dia phuong) nhu go
khoa`Dip and move (in water)#Lock. padlock#ock#ey#uckle#urn off#lose#uckle#subject of study y khoa medicine
khoa bang`(cu) (System of) competition-examinations#aureate in former competition-examinations
khoa chu`Combination-lock
khoa cu`(cu) System of former competition-examinations
khoa dai`(cu) Vaunt, boast
khoa giao`nhu khoa bang
khoa hoan`(cu) Graduation in to mandarinhood
khoa hoc`ourse#science
khoa hoc luan`Epistemology
khoa keo`Zip, zip-fastener, (my) zipper
khoa luan`Graduation paper, minor thesis#raduation paper, minor thesis
khoa mieng`Gag (bong), muzzle (bong)
khoa muc`(cu) nhu khoa bang
khoa tay`o hand-cuff,#ammer-lock
khoa than`Nude,naked#ude; naked
khoa truong`(cu) Competition-examinations#(cung noi) Chu nhiem khoa Dean, head of a university department#to boast; to brag
khoac`to put on
khoac lac`Brag, boast
khoai`pleased; satisfied; joyful#potato; sweet potato
khoai cam`pleasant feeling
khoai cha`nhu khoai tra
khoai chi`(be) overjoyed
khoai dao`(dia phuong) Edible canna
khoai dong`Arrowroot
khoai hoat`(it dung) Enlivened, freshened, braced up
khoai lac`pleasure; delight
khoai lang`Sweet potato, batata
khoai mon`Indian taro
khoai nua`Amorfophallus
khoai nuoc`water-taro
khoai rieng`Edible canna
khoai sap`Big-rooted taro
khoai so`taro
khoai tay`potato
khoai tra`(feel) Delighted
khoai tu`Edible yam 
khoai vac`Winged yam
khoam`Crooked, hooked#Slightly bent,crooked, hooked#khoam khoam) (lay, y giam)
khoan`Written promise#ontract to sell one's child to a pagoda#ire by the piece#drill; borer; brace#to bore; to drill; to perforate#term; item; article
khoan dai`(cu) Treat kindly (the prisoners for war...)#to entertain
khoan dung`tolerant; lenient
khoan hau`(cu) Generous, magnanimous
khoan hoa`Generous and kind 
khoan hong`to clement
khoan khoai`(feel) at ease
khoan nhuong`compromise
khoan tay`Take it easy
khoan thai`deliberate, bisurely
khoan thu`to forgive, to tolerate
khoan trang`Leave (some work) entirely to (someone); give(someone) a blank cheque
khoang`Mineral#Stir#ake off with#distance; interval; space; compass#bout#hold (of boat)
khoang cach`Distance, space
khoang chat`mineral
khoang chung`About, approximately
khoang da`(van chuong) open country
khoang dang`Roomy and well- ventilated, spacious and well-ventilated room#arge minded liberal, open minded
khoang dat`(van chuong) Leisured#free
khoang hoa`Mineralize#to mineralize
khoang khoat`commodious
khoang khong`Space (including the atmosphere)
khoang nhac`orchestra pit, pit(in a theatre)
khoang rong`Expanse
khoang san`minerals
khoang vat`Mineral
khoang vat hoc`mineralogy
khoanh`Plot#e egocentric, Be self-centered, be wrapped up in oneself, selfish#slice#to coil; to curl
khoanh doc`Cruel
khoanh khac`instant; moment; short space of time
khoanh tay`Fold one's arms (in front of one's chest)
khoanh vung`Delineate an area for investigation...)
khoat`(it dung) Width#eckon, wave
khoat dat`Open-minded
khoay`Cowlick
khoc`Very (dry)#khong khoc) (lay, y tang) Parched#o cry; to weep; to shed tears
khoc hai`Disastrous.#ll those disastrous events were after all due to money
khoc liet`violent; fierce
khoc loc`Weep and moan for a long time
khoc muon`Be a professional mourner, be a weepper
khoc tham`Cry one's heart out.
khoc than`Lament, Bewail 
khoe`(cu,van chuong) Corner, angle, canthus#rick #Strong ; healthy#ble to stand#ig; hard;much#anthus; corner (of eyes)#to brag; to boast; to show off
khoe khoan`Well, healtly#ot so hard
khoe khoang`Boast, brag, show off
khoe manh`trong bodied; healthy
khoe me`Show off 
khoeo`nhu kheo
khoet`to bore; to pierce; to broach
khoi`block#block; mass; bulk#high sea; open sea#to enlarge; to dig#khoi benh) to recover one's health#moke
khoi binh`Raise an army for a war
khoi chung`(van chuong) quite far, quite remote, far away
khoi cong`to begin to work
khoi dau`Start, begin
khoi diem`Starting point
khoi dien`(van chuong) Located far away in a far remote place.#ne's home place was thousands of mountains and streams away
khoi dong`Start, start up (may)
khoi giap`(cu) First laureate in national competition-examination
khoi hai`funny; comic; humorous
khoi han`Open the hostilities
khoi hanh`to start off; to start away
khoi loan`Rebel, rise (against an estalished authority according to the feudatists' conception)
khoi luong`volume, amount, weight
khoi mao`Introductory
khoi nghia`Rise up in arms (against an opperessive rule)
khoi ngo`handsome; good-looking
khoi nguyen`First laureate (in former examination-copetitions)#Rise, orgin, beginning
khoi oc`brain
khoi phat`Rise
khoi phuc`to recover
khoi sac`Prosper, thrive
khoi sau`Make more acute, worsen
khoi su`Begin, start, set in
khoi thao`Make the first draft (of a document...)
khoi thuy`Initital
khoi tinh`Obsessive love, haunting passion.#n obsessive love impossible to dispel even when it is carried with one down into the nether regions
khoi to`(luat phap) Introduction of instance
khoi vi`(cu) Mightly, imposing
khoi xuong`to take the initiative
khom`cluster; clump#nhu khom#to bow; to bend
khom khom`xem khom (lay)#xem khom (lay) 
khon`Land in a fix#wise; sage
khon cuc`(it dung) Utterly destitute 
khon cung`Destitute#No end of, No shortage of
khon don`Poverty-stricken, miserable
khon hon`Be wise, be reasonable! (tieng doa)
khon kheo`cute; clever
khon kho`In very reduced circumstances, very poor#utterly miserable; wretched
khon kiep`God-damned
khon le`Impossible#t is impossible for a bird in cage to soar up in the air 
khon lon`Grow up to the age of discretion
khon nan`Mean, base#hat a misfortune! What a piece of unluck!
khon ngoan`wise
khon noi`unfortunately
khon quan`Desperately poor, In great want
khon thieng`Capable of being propitiated (noi ve linh hon nguoi chet)
khon xiet`No end of#e lametend with no end of grief
khong`(dia phuong) Bent (of the back)#Without pay, for nothing#not; nothing; without#air
khong bao`Vacuole
khong bao gio`never
khong che`to restrain; to control; to dominate
khong chi`Blank
khong chien`air battle, dog-fight
khong chung`perhaps; may be
khong chuyen`Non-professional, amateur
khong dam`to dare not
khong dau`Unfounded, not based on facts
khong doi`(toan) Invariable, constant
khong doi dat`Air -to-ground
khong doi khong`Air-to-air (missile)
khong dung`It is no accident.
khong gian`space
khong giao`confucianism
khong he`never
khong ke`not counting, excluding
khong khi`air; atmosphere
khong kich`Attack with planes, stage an air attack
khong lo`colossal, giant, tremendous
khong luc`air-force
khong ngo`Unexpected, accidental
khong ngot`Ceaseless, continual
khong nhan`irspace
khong nhung`nhu chang nhung Not only
khong phan`air space
khong quan`air force
khong sao`never mind! It doesn't matter
khong tac`Hijack, hijacker
khong tap`Air attack
khong the`mpossible; unable
khong trung`Air 
khong tuoc`(van chuong) Peacock
khong tuong`Utopian
khong van`Air transport
khop`to have stage fright#joint; articulation
khop rang`(ky thuat) Gear
khop xuong`Joint
khu`Decrepit#Get rid of, dispose of, liquidate#hoa hoc) Deoxidize#bottom#zone; district; area; quarter
khu biet`Make a clear distinction
khu giai phong`iberated zone
khu he`(sinh hoc) Regional flora; regional fauna
khu hoi`to go and to come back
khu khu`Clattering(groan)#Grip, clutch
khu pho`(cu) Quater
khu tru`Localize#to eliminate
khu truc`Fight (noi ve may bay)
khu truc ham`Destroyer
khu trung`to sterilize
khu uy`Zone (communist) party committe
khu vuc`Zone, area
khu xu`Arrange, settle
khua`to cut little by little#to strike; to beat
khuan`(vi khuan) Bacterium#to carry
khuat`(Be) hidden from view,(Be) sheltered from#Be) absent#Be)Gone;(Be) dead and gone#e brought to one's knees, be subdued
khuat phuc`to yield; to submit
khuat tat`Dubious and tortuous
khuat than`Bow to
khuat tiet`(cu) Give up one's uprightness
khuay`(Find) solace, relieve#he fragrant grass could not give solace to her heart#to stir; to move around
khuay dong`Rouse
khuay khoa`khuay khoa cho qua thi gio to relieve the time#nhu khuay
khuay roi`Provoke an uproar in, behave rowdily in
khuc`crack (of finger-joints)#iece; section; chunk
khuc chiet`lear
khuc khich`iggling
khuc khuyu`inuous; tortuous
khuc xa`o refract; to bend (rays, etc)
khue cac`room of a maiden
khue khon`(cu; van chuong) Harem,gynaeceum
khue mon`(cu,van chuong) nhu khue khon
khue nu`(cu,van chuong) Damsel (of a feudat high family)
khue phong`Bower, boudoir
khuech`brag
khuech dai`to amplify; to expand; to magnify
khuech khoac`to boast, to brag
khuech tan`to diffuse
khuech truong`to develope; to extend
khui`to unpack (goods)
khum`Curved,bent, arched, convex#khum khum (lay, y giam)
khum khum`xem khum (lay)
khum num`o cower; to cringe
khung`(cu) Consent, accept, agree#Stop suddenly#crazy; dotty; cracked#frame
khung bo`to terrorize
khung canh`Framework
khung chau`(giai phau) Pelvis
khung cui`Loom, weavin loom
khung hoang`crisis; critical time
khung khiep`terrible, horrible
khung khinh`Be at odds with
khung thanh`(the thao) Goal
khuoc`(cu) Luck bestowed by a deity, blessing
khuoc tu`to refuse; to decline
khuom nam`(thong tuc) For ages, long since
khuon`shape; pattern; mould
khuon kho`shape and size
khuon mat`face
khuon mau`model, pattern
khuon phep`Rule of behaviour, rule of conduct, discipline
khuon sao`routine
khuon thieng`(cu,van chuong) The creator
khuon trang`(cu,van chuong) Fair face# fair plump face
khuon xanh`(cu, van chuong) nhu khuon thieng
khuon xep`Settle, see to (something) done satisfactorily
khuot`Dead beat, ded tired, dog tired
khuou`Chinese laughing-thrush (chim)
khut khit`Sniff sporadic
khuu`to smell#sense of) smell
khuu giac`(the sense of) smell
khuy`button; button-hole#elbow
khuy bam`press-stud, snap-fastener
khuy tet`Plaited button
khuya`late at night; midnight
khuya khoat`nhu khuya
khuya som`Day at night
khuyen`dog#to advise; to recommend; to admonish
khuyen bao`to admonish
khuyen can`to dissuade
khuyen cao`o recommend
khuyen du`(cu) Give recommen-dation, advise 
khuyen giai`to console; to solace
khuyen giao`Make a collection (noi ve nguoi dao phat)
khuyen hoc`Encourage study
khuyen khich`to encourage; to stimulate
khuyen ma`(xau) Dog and horse; loyal servants
khuyen nghi`Recommend, give recommendations
khuyen nho`Cynic
khuyen nhu`Admonish lovingly
khuyen nong`(cu) Encourage agriculture 
khuyen ran`Admonish
khuyen thien`(cu) Encourage people to do good, encourage good actions
khuyen ung`(cu) Hireling
khuyet`wanting; lacking; missing; vacant
khuyet danh`Anonymous
khuyet diem`defect; imperfection
khuyet tat`Defect; flaw
khuyet tich`(luat) Default 
khuynh`inclined
khuynh dao`to subvert; to topple
khuynh diep`Eucalyptus essential oil
khuynh gia bai san`Be ruined, go to the gogs
khuynh huong`inclination; vocation; tendency
khuynh huu`nhu huu khuynh Rightist deviationistic
khuynh ta`nhu ta khuynh Leftist deviationistic
khuynh thanh`Bewitching
ki`(the thao) Skeetle#nhu ki lo#to rub off; to rub out
ki cach`Clatter (tieng duc deo)
ki co`Scrub up and down,scrub carefully
ki keo`to argue about the price
ki lo`ilogram
ki si`cavalryman; cavalier; horseman
kia`Before the day before yesterday; before the year before last year#fter the day after tomorrow#ne of the recent year (day)#here#over; that
kia kia`nhu kia
kich`play; drama#size; measure pill; halberd#to ambush; to attack
kich bac`Run down, disparage
kich ban`Scenario
kich cam`pantomime
kich chien`Fight fiercely, engage in a fiercely battle
kich co`Dimention; size 
kich com`(dia phuong) nhu kich com
kich dong`to arouse, to rouse ; to excite
kich duc`Aphrodisiac
kich hoa`Dramatize
kich liet`violent, drastic, vehement
kich mua`Ballet
kich ngan`Sketch
kich noi`Play
kich phat`Exacerbated
kich si`Playwright, dramatics
kich thich`to excite; to rouse
kich thich to`hormone
kich tho`Versified play, play in verse
kich thuoc`measure; size; dimension
kich tinh`Theatricality, dramatics
kich truong`Scene
kich vui`Comedy 
kiem`(ket hop han che) Thrifty#alkali#sword#to search for; to clook for; to find#to count; to control; to check#to hold
kiem ai`(be) equally fraternal to everyone
kiem an`Look for a living, look for a means of livelihood
kiem chac`Live by one;s wits, make small profits by dishonest tricks
kiem che`to subdue; to restrain; to curb, to dominate
kiem chung`Verify; confirm
kiem chuyen`Pick a quarrel, provoke an incident
kiem co`Find a pretext
kiem cung`Sword and bow, weapons (noi khai quat)#ilitary career
kiem dich`Put in to quarantine
kiem diem`Review (of experience drawing), sum up the experience draw from
kiem dung`With a twofold purpose
kiem duyet`to censor
kiem hiep`knight-errant
kiem hoa`(hoa) Alcalinize#Coerce, put under restraint, place under duress
kiem hoc`(cu) Local education officer (thoi thuoc phap)
kiem ke`Inventory
kiem khach`nhu kiem hiep
kiem lam`(cu) Forestry
kiem nghiem`Analyse,test
kiem nhiem`Be concurrently having many qualities... to a high degree
kiem phieu`Count the votes
kiem sat`Investigate
kiem sat truong`Procurator
kiem soat`to control; to examine
kiem soat vien`Controller, comptroller
kiem song`Earn one's living
kiem thao`Criticize, self-criticize
kiem thuat`Swordsmanship, fencing
kiem tinh`(hoa) Alcalinity
kiem toa`to restrain; to bind
kiem tra`Inspect
kiem uoc`Sensibly thrifty
kien`ant#on kien#bale; parcel; package#to sue; to enter; to institute#nhu can
kien cao`Sue, bring a legal action.institute a law suit (noi khai quat)
kien chi`firm determination#teadfast, firm
kien co`strong ; solid
kien dinh`firm, consistent
kien gan`persevering
kien giai`Interpretation
kien hieu`effective; efficacious
kien khang`(trang trong) Well, healthy
kien khon`nhu can khon
kien lap`Establish, set up
kien nghi`(it dung) Determined, resolved#petition
kien nhan`patient; constent
kien nhi`(cu,van chuong) Strong man
kien quoc`Found a state
kien quyet`determined, resolute
kien tam`(be) firm in one purpose, (remain) steadfast
kien tao`(dia) Tectonics
kien tap`Listen in (for practice), visit (elemetary and secondary schools) (for practice). (Noi ve giao sinh su pham)
kien thiet`to construct, to conduct
kien thuc`knowledge; learning
kien tin`(ton giao) Pietist 
kien toan`Consolidate, strengthen, bring to full strength
kien tri`Keep firmly (to), hold (stand, keep) one's ground, stick to
kien trinh`loyal; faithful
kien truc`Architecture#ietnamese art has been influenced by its own orthodox culture by Chinese and Indian cultures. Traces from various civilization can be found throughout the whole country: the renowned Dong Son bronze drums (a specific trait og the ancient Vietnamese culture), the buddhist architecture in Bac Ninh, the ancient imperial palaces in Hue..
kien truc su`Architect
kien trung`nhu trung kien
kien tung`nhu kien cao
kien tuong`good player
kien van`(cu) knowledge, clearning
kieng`(dia phuong) nhu kinh#Gong-like musical instrument.#dia phuong) nhu canh#Stand on tiptoe#Tripod(for a cooking pot)#racelet, necklace#void (out of contempt)#to abstain from, to forbear
kieng cu`Abstain from unsuitable foods, keep a diet
kieng de`Avoid
kieng khem`nhu kieng cu
kieng ne`o respect; to have regard and so consideration for
kiep`life; generation
kiep nguoi`Human life ; human bondage
kiep truoc`ast life
kiet`(med) dysentery#Mean#xhaust
kiet cu`Stone-broke.#hough stone-broke, one can still afford indulging in drinks
kiet luc`To exhaustion
kiet que`exhausted
kiet suc`to be worn out
kiet tac`Masterpiece
kiet xac`Shabbily penniless
kiet xuat`Towering,pre-eminent
kieu`Decline to come, decline attend#Pray (to a deity or dead person's soul) to get in to a medium (and grant one's wishes...)#arrogant; proud; haughty#model; pattern; design#palanquin, palanqueen
kieu bao`(Overseas) national
kieu benh`Decline on pretext of inllness
kieu binh`(cu) Service-proud military man, arrogant soldier
kieu cach`Model and model#annered
kieu cang`haughty; proud
kieu cu`Reside abroad, be a national
kieu dan`immigrant
kieu diem`charming; graceful
kieu hanh`Proud
kieu hoi`Overseas national currency exchange
kieu hung`(it dung) Valiant
kieu mach`Buckwheat
kieu mau`model; simple; pattern
kieu ngao`Arrogant, proud, haughty
kieu nhi`(cu) Belovad daughter
kieu nuong`(cu) Fair, fair lady, fair damsel 
kieu suc`(van chuong) showy, spuriously brilliant; affected
kieu tu`(cu) nhu cao tu
kim`Pincers, pliers#rip with pincers, grip with pliers#raw#needle; hand#etal
kim anh`cherokee rose
kim ban vi`Gold standard
kim bang`safety-pin#truth friend
kim cai`(cu) Conjugal attachment, cojugon union
kim chi`Sewing work, stitching work 
kim chi nam`Magnetic needle.#bong)Lodestar
kim co`The present and the past 
kim cuc`Indian chrysanthemum
kim cuong`Diamond 
kim dan`Knitting-needle
kim dong`Fairy's page. child
kim gam`Pin 
kim hoan`Silver and gold jewellery (noi khai quat)
kim hon`Golden wedding
kim khi`metalware, hardware
kim lan`(cu) close friend 
kim loai`metal
kim ma ngoc duong`Gold-horse and jade house; privileges of a mandarin
kim moc`Crochet-hook
kim mon`(cu) Golden door; noble family
kim ngach`(ke toan) Turn-over
kim ngan`gold and silver
kim ngoc`Valuables#eople of rank and fashion
kim nhu`Golden powder
kim o`(fig) the sun
kim oc`(cu) Golden palace ; royal apartments
kim phong`(cu,van chuong) Autumnal breeze
kim thoa`gold hairpin 
kim thuoc`nhu kim loai
kim thuong`(cu) His Mjesty (the ruling king)
kim tu thap`pyramid
kin`secret; private#ight
kin dao`Secretive, secret
kin hoi`ir-tight
kin mieng`Discreet, guarded in what one say s
kin mit`Very tight
kin tieng`Keep mum about where one is 
kinh`prayer; prayer-book; the bible canal#to respect#whale
kinh ai`Respect and love
kinh bon`(ton giao) Liturgical books 
kinh can`Near-sighted (short-sighted) glasses#Showing deep respect, profoundly respectful
kinh chuc`to wish respectfully
kinh cu`(cu) Be frightened
kinh di`thrilling, terrible, horrible
kinh dich`Be in opposition, be in enmity
kinh dien`canon
kinh do`Longitude#capital; capital city
kinh doanh`to carry on business
kinh dong`Shake, upset (with fright)
kinh hai`nhu kinh so
kinh hien vi`microscope
kinh hoang`scared; consternated; frightened
kinh hon`Be frightened out of one's wits
kinh ke`Buddhist books of prayers (noi khai quat)
kinh khiep`(it dung) Terrible
kinh khung`Frightful, horrible#thong tuc) with a vengeance
kinh kich`Chinese opera theatre#xem kich (lay)
kinh lao`Old people's glasses, far-sighted glasses#espect the aged
kinh luan`Manage State affairs
kinh lup`Magnifier
kinh men`Revere and love, esteem
kinh ne`Feel respect and consideration for, to have regard for
kinh ngac`(cu; van chuong) Whale and crocodile; brave and strong soldiers; fierce rebels#amazed; stupefied; aghast
kinh nghe`(cu; van chuong)Male whale and female whale; brave and strong soldier; fierce rebels
kinh nghiem`experience
kinh ngu`(van chuong) Whale
kinh nguyet`menses; periods
kinh nhat tung`(ton giao) Office 
kinh nhuong`Give priority with respect
kinh nien`chronic
kinh phi`Expenses, expenditure
kinh phong`Epileptic convulsion
kinh phuc`to admire
kinh qua`Undergo 
kinh quyen`Act according to circumstances, act casually
kinh ram`Dark glasses, sun-glasses
kinh so`Feel great fear, be
kinh su`Classics and history#nhu kinh do
kinh tai`(kinh te tai chinh) (noi tat) Econmy and finance
kinh te`economy
kinh te hoc`economics
kinh te tai chinh`Economy and finance
kinh thanh`nhu kinh ky#the Bible
kinh thien van`Astronomical telescope
kinh tiem vong`Periscope
kinh tom`Horrible
kinh trong`Respect
kinh truyen`Ancient Chinese classic works
kinh tuyen`meridian
kinh vi`(May kinh vi) Theodolite
kinh vien`Far-sighted glasses#Scholastic
kinh vien vong`Telescope
kinh yeu`beloved
kip`in time#urgent; pressing
kip chay`(van chuong, cu) Sooner or later
kip no`etonator
kip thoi`Timerly, in time
kit`Dark, dense#Kin kit (lay, y tang)
ky`Bamboo-plaited dustpan#Small table#he sixth Heavenly stem.#dia ly) Period#anniversary of death#to fear; to be afraid#great-great-grandfather; great-great grandmother#careful; painstaking#flag; banner#chess#period; term; date#to sign
ky ao`iraculous
ky cong`xploit; wonderful
ky cuc`dd; funny
ky cuong`aws; rules
ky cuu`eteran
ky da`aran; monitor
ky di`strange, odd
ky dieu`arvellous, wondderful
ky gia`eporter; pressman; journalist
ky giong`lamander
ky hieu`ymbol; sign; notation
ky hoa`o sketeh
ky ket`o contract; to conclude
ky luat`iscipline
ky luc`ecord
ky nghe`ndustry; manufacture
ky ngo`o meet in an unusual way
ky nguyen`ra; epoch
ky niem`emory; souvenir; keep sake#o commemorate
ky ninh`uinine
ky nu`ourtesan; prostitute
ky quan`onder; strange thing
ky sinh`arasitic
ky su`hronicle#ngineer
ky thac`o trust; to confide
ky thi`examination#to distinguish; to discriminate
ky thuat`echnique; technology
ky tuc xa`ormitory
ky uc`emory
ky vien`rothel
la`exhausted; weak#fine silk#to be#then#to press iron#leaf#heet; leaf#mule#la truong a major#to cry; to shout#strange; foreign#xem nuoc la
la bai`card
la ban`compass
la ca`to loiter; to hang about
la cai`rag
la cha`Stream down, flow down (noi ve nuoc mat).#er tears streamed down endlessly
la chan`shield
la chet`(thuc vat) leaflet; foliole
la co`flag
la da`nhu la da
la doi`queer; trange
la don`gladiolus
la dong`(thuc vat) Phrynium
la gi`No one is unaware of, every one's knowledge
la han`(ton giao) Arhant
la het`to scream, to shriek
la ky`ueer, strange
la lach`spleen
la lang`(xau) Cry for help
la liem`Scavenge for food
la liet`in abundance
la loi`Find fault, scold#to indulge in familiarities with
la lung`strange, extraordinary
la luot`Limp, listless#Silks and satins, finery
la ma`Rice seeding leaf
la mang`to scold
la mat`Strange-looking#strange, foreign
la mia`Vomer#vomer
la mieng`Eaten for the first time, of a strange taste
la o`to boo, to shout down
la ray`Scold
la sach`manyplies, manifold
la sat`Scold, termagant, shrew
la sen`Jacket collar lining
la ta`loose; incoherent
la tham`(van chuong) Love message, love letter#ballott-paper; voting-paper
la thuong`unusual, extraordinary
la tinh`atin
la toa`With overturned belt
la troi`Cry to God for mercy (for help)
lac`(y hoc) dartre. rush#squinting#peanut; ground-nut#to lose; to stray#to shake; to wag; to bump
lac buoc`nhu luu lac
lac da`camel
lac dac`scattered; spattered
lac dan`Stray from one's herd (flock...)
lac de`to digress from a subject
lac dieu`out of tune
lac duong`Lose one's way, go astray
lac hau`(lich su) Paladin (under the reign of Kings Hung)#backward lagging behind
lac huong`Lose one's bearing
lac khoan`(cu) name and tile (written at the bottom of a paintin, hangings...)
lac loai`alone in a strange land
lac loi`lone one's way, get lost
lac long`stray, lost
lac lu`to oscillate; to swing
lac mat`nhu lac
lac nghiep`(An cu lac nghiep) To settle down
lac quan`optimistic; sanguine
lac quyen`make (take) up a collection, subscribe
lac thanh`(cu) Pot-hanging pqrty, pot-hanging ceremony
lac thu`pleasure; delight; comforts
lac tien`(thuc vat) Passion-flower
lac tuong`(lich su) Military chief (under the reign of kings Hung)
lac van`Out of rhyme
lach`rivulet; canal#spleen#to dodge; to swerve; to worm
lach bach`to waddle
lach ca lach cach`xem lach cach (lay)
lach cach`clack#click, clatter
lach dach`to waddle
lach tach`Crack#to crackle; to splatter
lai`helm; rudder; steering-wheel#to steer; to drive; to pilot#jasmine; jessamine#slight sloped#profit; interest#till; should; back#to come; to arrive#varmishtree; candleberry. hemline; turn up#of mixed blood; cross-bred#worm
lai bo`(cu) Ministry of the Interior
lai bua`(cung noi) tra bua Recover one's appetite (after an illness)
lai buon`dealer; merchant
lai cai`isexual; hermaphrodite
lai cang`(xau) Miscellaneous
lai cao`(cu) Article sent to a newspaper (to be inserted)
lai do`boatman; bargee
lai giong`(sinh hoc) Atavism, throw-back, revversion to type#to cross breeds
lai hang`(cu) Surrender
lai hon`Pull oneself together, regain self-control (after a fright)
lai kinh`(cu) Go to the capital
lai lang`Spill profusely#urst with (some feeling)
lai lich`origin; source
lai mat`Newly-weds' first visit to the briede's family (on the wedding day's morrow)
lai muc`(cu) Clerkk (in a district yamen)
lai mui`back-stitch
lai nguoi`Recuperate (after a long illness)
lai nguyen`(cu) Source
lai nhai`Insistent#annoyingly insistent#nhu lai nhai
lai nua`In addition, on the other hand
lai qua`(cu) Portion reserved for the people who had brought engagement (wedding) offering
lai rai`dragging on; intermittent and light
lai sinh`(cu) After-life, next life
lai suat`Interest rate
lai suc`to recover one's strength
lai tao`Create (a new variety) by cross-breeding
lai tap`Hybrid
lai the`(cu) Future life, after life
lai tinh`Come to, come round, regain consciousness
lai vang`to frequent
lai xe`to drive (a car)
lam`forest; woods#indigo-blue; deep blue#to confuse; to mistake#to do#to be
lam ai`Plough (hoe) (the soil) loose
lam an`to work, to do, to earn one's living
lam bam`to mumble#to mumble, to grumble
lam ban`(the thao) Score a goal (in football)#to make friends ; to marry
lam bang`Serve as evidence
lam bay`to do silly things
lam benh`to fall ill; to be taken ill
lam bep`Do the cooking, cook
lam bieng`lazy; slack; indolent
lam bo`Demur insincerely#ive onself airs.#dia phuong)Feign, simulate, pretend
lam cai`Keep the bank, be the banker (at a gambling table)
lam cam`doting
lam cao`Think something beneath one's dignity
lam cham`spotted, dotted
lam chi`(dia phuong) nhu lam gi
lam chiem`Make preparations for the fifth-month rice crop
lam cho`to cause, to make
lam chu`to own, to hold the ownesship
lam chung`to be about to die#to witness
lam chuong`miasma
lam co`Prepare a feast (on a death anniversary, wedding...)#to weed, to shoot up
lam cong`to work
lam dang`to adorn oneself
lam dau`Be a daughter-law#to sign, to signal; to make the cross
lam di`to prostitute oneself
lam diu`to abate, to ease
lam dom`nhu lam dang
lam du`to kick up a row
lam dung`to abuse; to misuse
lam duyen`Remember one another#ince
lam gi`What to do#hat for#o, nothing
lam gia`Impose one's terms (from a vantage position)#to counterfeit, to fake up
lam giac`Rebel, revolt
lam giau`to enrich oneself
lam giay`Sign a paper (certifying, stating something)
lam guong`Set an example#ake an example (of somebody)
lam hang`Window-dress (My)
lam hong`to foil; to wreck; to thwart
lam hu`Spoil
lam khach`Stand on ceremony
lam khi`nhu lam chuong
lam khoan`to do job-work
lam kieu`nhu lam cao#nhu lam mau
lam lac`wrong, unsound
lam lai`to do again
lam lan`to mistake, to misjudge
lam lanh`to make it up with
lam le`Become someone's concubine#Hold a ceremony, observe rituals for (something)#to attempt; to intend
lam let`to look slyly
lam liet`stately; imposing
lam lieu`Run the risk (of doing something), run risks
lam lo`Ignore, turn a blind eye to
lam loan`to rebel, to vise up against
lam loi`be at fault; make a mistake
lam long`Pluck, deplume (a hen, goose..), remove hair from the skin of (a pig... when killing it)
lam lu`ragged; tattered; shabby
lam lung`nhu lam
lam ly`aciturn, bittle saying
lam ma`Hold burial rites for
lam mai`Act as a matchmaker
lam mau`Grow subsidiary crops#to serve as a model
lam moi`Fall a prey to#nhu lam mai
lam mua`Make preparations for the tenth-month rice crop
lam muon`nhu lam cong
lam nan`to fall into calamity
lam nen`Make one's way in life (in the world)#ecome, grow
lam ngo`nhu lam lo
lam nguoi`As a man
lam nham`Eating frequent snacks#alavering#bungled, done by halves
lam nhuc`to insult; to affront
lam phat`to inflate
lam phien`to disturb; to annoy
lam quen`to make the accquaintance of
lam tam`spray-like
lam than`miserable; wretched
lam thoi`provisional;
lam tien`to have a lot of money#to squeeze; to blackmail
lam xong`to finish; to come to an end
lan`To encroach#o turn#Phosphorus#nicorn, kylin#aper unicornhead (used in a traditional dance)#fold; wrinkle#hand-basket#time#to grope one's way; to shuffle on#to confound; to make a#doting; forgetful#to dive; to submerge#to encroach; to infringe#to nudge#to pread; to run#orchid#to roll; to wallow#to slip away; to steal off
lan can`banister; hand-rail#near; next to; contiguous; neighbouring
lan dan`unsucessful
lan hoi`little by little; gradually
lan lon`mixed; confused#to toss about; to throw oneself about
lan luot`in turn; by roster
lan quan`to follow; to hover
lan quang`phosphorescence
lan quat`to lurk about
lan song`wave
lan tay`to press one's finger print on
lan tinh`phosphorous
lan tran`to spread all over
lan tranh`to elude
lan vao`o get in; to mingle
lang`(of liquid) to deposit#Village#et, table (in a game), circles#LOATING VILLAGES: Rearing fish in cages under rafts has become increasingly common in a number of countries, but perhaps nowhere is this occupation as advantageous as in Vietnam with its maze of rivers and streams criss-crossing the country from north to south, from west to east, totalling perhaps millions of kilometres in length.When it comes to raising fish in cages, AnGiang province in the Mekong River delta has always taken the lead. It has 40 to 50 years' experience, has the biggest number of cages and produces more caged fish than any other locality in the country. It is no exaggeration to say that the fishing rafts on AnGiang rivers are true floating villages.If you ever come to AnGiang, do not fail to visit Con Tien where you can fully appreciate the poetic nature of such villages. They are made of large rafts of either bamboo or timber depending on the capabilities of the fish raisers. In most cases, they are timber rafts measuring about 12 by 5 metres and 3 metres in height. After five months -- the usual time for the fish to complete their life cycle -- the family of the fish raiser anchors the raft on some part of the Tien, Hau, or Chau Doc rivers or any major canals. At present, most districts in AnGiang such as Long Xuyen, Chau Doc, Cho Moi, Phu Tan, Phu Chau and Chau Phu raise caged fish, but this occupation is still essentially practised in Con Tien village, Chau Doc township Con Tien has the advantage of being located near the supply centre for young fish and fish meal (the Chau Doc market) and also on a fast-flowing river. Con Tien actually accounts for almost half of all the fish rafts of AnGiang provinceThe two main fish species raised in cages in AnGiang are the Ba Sa and Chai which take their food from the water surface. Their food consists chiefly of rice bran mixed with vegetables such as pumpkin.A raft for rearing 50,000 Ba Sa fish needs about 3,500 kilograms of food, but for rearing 10,000 to 20,000 Chai, only 00 to 800 kilos of food are required. One raft needs only three workhands. The first harvest from a raft averages 12 tonnes of Ba Sa and three tonnes of he or Chai fish.+Net profit may account for 25 % - 30 % of the proceeds. But not everything has been plain sailing for the fish raisers of AnGiang. At its peak year, AnGiang had 1,200 rafts. In 1971, there were only 662 and the number slumped to 225 in 1980. A rapid recovery began in 1984, when the local government decreed new policies on prices and on the rearing and marketing of caged fish. Early in 1990, the AnGiang Aquatic Produce Import- Export Company loaned fish raisers three billion dong. It also found markets for caged fish in Australia, Hong Kong and Singapore. Subsequently, the number of rafts rose to 715 and fish output to 14,000 tonnes, double the figures for 1989. The expansion also provided jobs for 4,000 people. One of the biggest problems in caged fish raising in AnGiang is the supply of young fish, since most of them come from natural breeding. Production of all other fish still depends on natural breeding. Research and experimentation in this direction with regard to fish such as Ba Sa, Chai and Bong are going on at the provincial sciences committee. In recent years, caged fish raising has also been undertaken by other provinces such as Ha Tay, Ha Bac and Vinh Phu in the north and Hau Giang, Dong Thap and Long An in the south. In Ha Tay province west of Ha Noi, 200 families in the district of Ba Vi, Dan Phuong and My Duc keep more than 200 fish cages along the Da and Red Rivers. Ba Vi district alone has 165 cages, mainly raising Indian carp. They yield from two to three tonnes of fish per cage. On average, the fish raisers get from 16 to 24 million dong in income and about seven million in net profit. Riverside villages such as Thuan My, Tay Dang, Co Do and Minh Chau are gradually shifting from fishing in the river to raising fish in cages. The administration in Ba Vi has made a uniform loan of one million dong to every family of fish raisers. Experts are providing technical assistance to make fish spawn in the rivers, thus reducing production costs. Many families of farmers are also raising fish as a secondary occupation besides cultivation. One thousand families of farmers in Ba Vi district have registered for caged fish raising#basket#o slip away; to sneak away#roan; piebald#royal tomb; imperial tomb#silent; calm; quiet#smooth; glossy#tael#to cut into thin slices
lang bam`quack
lang bat`to wander
lang ben`(y hoc) tetter
lang gieng`neighbouring
lang kinh`prism
lang lang`acry; very light
lang le`quiet, silent
lang lo`light; gay; immoral
lang loan`saucy, pert
lang ma`to revile
lang man`romantic
lang ngat`dead silence
lang nhang`to drag on
lang nhuc`to humiliate, to insult
lang phi`to waste; to squander
lang quang`to loiter about
lang quen`oblivion
lang tai`to listen to
lang tam`mausoleums, royal tombs
lang thang`to wander, to roam
lang tranh`to evade
lang tru`prism
lang tu`vagabond
lang vang`to prowl about
lang xang`to bustle
lanh`cold#good; happy#to heal; to skin over#to avoid; to shun#to receive; to get#satin
lanh chua`lord
lanh dam`cold; chilly; apathetic
lanh dao`to lead; to guide; to conduct
lanh dia`ief
lanh hai`sea (water) - territories
lanh hoi`to digest; to comprehend
lanh lan`intact; unbroken
lanh le`smart; quiet; alert
lanh leo`cold; cold and cheerless
lanh lung`cold, frigid
lanh mat`to avoid meeting
lanh nan`to flee away, to refuge
lanh nguoi`to feel one's blood freeze
lanh nhat`frigid; frosty
lanh su`consul
lanh tho`domain; territory
lanh xa`to draw aside; to keep away
lao`dart; javelin#y hoc) tuberculosis#to hurt; to plunge#insolent; impertinent#noi lao to lie#old
lao ba`old lady
lao boc`old servant
lao cong`labourer
lao dao`dizzy, full of hardship#to stagger; to be unsteady
lao dong`labour
lao giao`Faoism
lao kho`hard and miserable
lao luyen`expert; experienced
lao nhao`badly mixed
lao phien`toilsome and sad
lao suy`senile; decrepit
lao tam`worrisome, troubled
lao tu`prison, jail
lap`to form; to establish; to erect#to join; to fit#to repeat#to occlude; to fill up; to stop
lap chi`to set one's mind on
lap cong`to achieve a feat
lap di`eccentric
lap ky luc`o achieve a record
lap lanh`to sparkle; to twinkle ; to gleam
lap liem`to gloss over
lap lo`to flicker
lap muu`to draw up a scheme
lap nghiep`to establish one's business
lap phap`to legislate; to make laws
lap truong`standpoint; view-point
lap tuc`at once, immediately
lap xuong`chinese sausage
lat`bamboo string#insipid; flat; not salted#rush#to pave#to turn over; to upturn; to capsize
lat dat`hurriedly, hastily
lat do`to overthrow; to subvert
lat nhao`to overturn, to overthrow
lat nhat`tiny; minute
lat nua`y and by; before long; later on
lat tay`to unmask
lat vat`sundry
lau`(Med) gonorrhoea; blennorrhagia#Illicit; contraband#long; long while ; a long time#multi-storied house#reed#to wipe; to mop up. lau tay to wipe one's hand#without a hiteh
lau bau`to grumble
lau ca`smart; cunning
lau chui`to clean; to wipe clean
lau dai`palace; castle
lau doi`long-standing
lau la`subordinates in a gang of bandits
lau linh`roguish; sly
lau xanh`brothel
lay`boggy; swampy#to prostrate oneself; to kowtow#to repeat; to reiterate#to shake#to spread; to infect; to communicate#to take#o carry out; to walk off#o pull; to withdraw
lay chuyen`to shake
lay co`to press the trigger#use as a pretext
lay cung`to question, to interrogate
lay dong`to move; to stir
lay lat`to last
lay le`for form's shake, perfunctorily
lay loi`muddy, slushy
lay long`try to win someone's heart
lay lung`famous; well-known
lay nhay`sticky; viscous ; gluey
lay on`ladiolus
lay xuong`o take down
le`To kowtow#o give (money, present) as a bribe#Bribe#estival, festive day, holiday#edge (of road, etc.) margin#odd; uneven#rapid; speedy; swift#reason#squint; cook-eyed#tear#to drag (one's feet)#pear#to loll (its tongue)#to scarify; to extract with a thorn
le bai`to worship
le do`polite, courteous
le duong`pavement; sidewalk ; road-side
le giao`rites, ethical behaviour
le le`teal
le loi`Mone; lonely#flickering; unsteady (light.)#way; manner
le luat`custom and law
le me`dwadling ; idle
le nghi`rites, rituals
le nghia`politeness and reason
le nhe`to be drawling
le phai`reason, common sense, right
le phep`politeness, courtesy
le phi`cost; expenses
le phuc`full dress; formal uniform
le ra`ought to
le song`deal of life
le te`scattered, sparse
le the`dragging; trailing
le thoi`practice
le thuoc`dependent; subordinate
le thuong tinh`common sense, common course
le vat`gift; present; offering
lem`glib; voluble#to smudge#dirty; soiled
len`stealthy; furtive; sneaky#to go up; to come up; to rise#to make one's way#wool#to stuff; to cram; to ram in
len an`to condemn; to sentence; to judgment
len duong`to start away; to start off
len gia`to raise price; to apprecoate
len lop`to teach, to give a lesson
len mat`to give oneself airs, to put on air
len men`to ferment
leng keng`ding-dong; tinkle
lenh`order, decree
lenh benh`cumbrous, cumbersome
lenh denh`to float; to drift
lenh lang`to spead all over, to spill all over
leo`(of animal) to copulate; to pair#mut leo stye#not straight ; unstraight#to climb; to swarm; to shin#to cut neatly
leo deo`along ; along behind
leo leo`(of water) very limpid
leo let`to flicker; to burn unsteadily
leo teo`scattered; sparse
leo treo`to climb
lep`flat
lep xep`deflated
let det`behinbhand
leu`tent
leu lao`untidy; slovenly
li`braren; brassy#otionless#dysentary
li lac`live
lia`to leave; to reparate; to part
lich`calendar
lich lam`to look over
lich su`History#Vietnam's history from an early age is a national history characterised by uninterrupted struggles against foreign invaders. The Northern Kingdom's Domination lasted one thousand years. This was one of the fiercest trials and periods of hardship in Vietnam's history of national development of the different tribal peoples inhabiting Vietnamese soil. However, the Viet people managed to maintain their particular cultural identity. Such revolts which were led by Hai Ba Trung (the two Trung ladies), Ba Trieu (Lady Trieu), and Ly Nam De and especially the historic victory at the Bach Dang river in 938, under the leadership of Ngo Quyen which finally led the Vietnamese people to a complete victory and they regained their national independence. National Construction and Defence for National Independence lasted about one thousand years (from the early 10th Century to the middle of the 19th Century). This period also witnessed several fierce struggles launched by the Vietnamese people against the northern aggressors. The wars of resistance included the battle against the Tong army in the 11th century, three separate wars against the invading Mongol army in the 13rd century, and the resistance against the Minh army in the 14th century. In the late 17th century, the Vietnamese feudal nation was faced with a social and economic crisis that led to an annexation of the country into two parts. However, the victory of the Tay Son revolt at the close of the 18th century reunified the country. In the first half of the 19th century, the Nguyen dynasty continued to consolidate national unification. Yet, a prevailing conservative attitude among Nguyen dynasty court officials allowed the country to drift into a period of stagnation and Vietnam eventually became a French colony. At present, the Vietnamese people are trying to develop their national economy in a very difficult situation mostly due to the dictatorship of the Vietnamese communist goverment. Now, let's have a chronological summary on Vietnamese history:#In the ancient times, Red River Civilization succeeded the native prehistoric cultures. At its apogee, the ancient Viet people's first nations (Van Lang, Au Lac) appeared#Thoi Bac Thuoc (Period of Chinese domination) lasted 1117 years between 179BC and 938#Cac quoc gia phong kien doc lap (Independent feudal nations)#Incontestably, Phong Trao Yeu Nuoc (Patriotic movements) always feature the heroic Vietnamese history. To have an overview of the Vietnamese culture, see also Cac Nen Van Hoa O Viet Nam #Restoration of cultural and historical monuments in Vietnam: Vietnam has 979 classified national monuments relics including 497 historical monuments, 440 ancient architectures (pagodas, temples and communal houses), 30 scenic places and 12 archaeological sites. Thirty years of war have inflicted serious damage on these monuments. Some have been almost completely destroyed like the old citadel at Quang Tri in Central Vietnam. Others were heavily damaged such as many temples, pagodas, churches and other places of worship in northern Vietnam Nature has also taken its toll. Conservation work has been compounded by growing appropriation of public lands by people for house construction, especially in the towns The government has taken positive steps in recent years to restore some of the most significant historical relies like the old capital in Hue, central Vietnam, Co Loa Citadel, the first capital of Vietnam, the ancient capital of Hoa Lu in Nam Ha province, or the temples of the Hung Kings, founders of the Vietnamese nation nearly 4,000 years ago. Conservationists are all interested in preserving original features. They have received helpful assistance in expertise from many countries, like Poland's assistance in the restoration of Cham towers in Central Vietnam, assistance from UNESCO and Japan in the restoration of old Hue and Hoi An and German assistance in the restoration of But Thap Pagoda in Ha Bac provinceOne major problem is the destruction caused by termites to iron-wood pillars in temples and pagodas. Vietnamese restorers have found a solution by drawing upon the experience of builders in the past. A common method is either to fill hollowed-out pillars with concrete or to replace them with new ones. But both have their drawbacks. In the first case, the concrete would detach from the wood within a few years. In the latter case, the cost involved and the risk of collapse during the replacement would be high.To solve the problem, Vietnamese restorers have combined the use of traditional termite killers with the spraying of chemicals into the infested pillars. That would both kill the insects and prevent the growth of fungi. They can gnaw away each year from 0.2mm to.5mm of wood. But what is more damaging is that the humid secretion they leave on the surface will create the necessary environment for the development of fungi. This damage can be best seen at Keo Pagoda in Thai Binh province, 100 km southeast of Ha Noi, where several hundred iron-wood pillars have been virtually eaten up.=Recent years in Ha Noi have seen the restoration of many pagodas and temples thanks to contributions in money and manpower from the population Since 1991, the local authorities have spent dozens of millions of dong on repairing the Temple of Literature, the first national university where 82 stone stelas can be found on which the names of 1,234 laureates of successive examinations in the feudal times are recorded. Cost of the whole project is estimated at 12 billion dong, or about 1 million dollars.Work is also going on for the renovation of ancient constructions on and around the Guom Lake in the centre of the capital city#polite; civil; courteous
liec`to look sidelong at; to glance
liem`to lick; to lap#to shroud, to lay out
liem khiet`honest; upright; honest
liem si`sense of shame
lien`(of wound) to heal; to skin over#continuous; successive#pot scroll
lien bang`federation; union
lien ben`ear at hand
lien bo`interministerial
lien can`to concern
lien doan`league; syndicate; grop
lien doanh`joint-venture
lien he`to contact ; to relate to ; to comect
lien hiep`to ally; to unite; to combine;to coalesce
lien hiep quoc`United nations
lien hop`to conjugate
lien khu`interzone
lien lac`conection; liaison; communication
lien quan`to concern
lien tay`immediately, at once
lien thoang`very glibly
lien tiep`continuous#interprovince
lien tinh`interprovince
lien tuong`to associate; to connect in ideas
lieng`to throw; to fling; to hurl; to sling
lieng xieng`rushing
liep`bamboo screen
liet`to rank; to assort#paralysed; paralytic
liet duong`impotent; with out sexual power
liet giuong`confined in bed
liet ke`to list, to enumerate
liet si`partiotic martyr
lieu`(bot) willow#to manage; to calculate#to risk; to venture#dose (of medicine)
lieu linh`venturesome; daring; reckless
lieu luong`dosage
lieu phap`(med) therapeutics
lim`(bot) ironwood#lose consciousness
lim dim`half-closed
linh`efficacious#skewer#soldier; private#to order; to command; to dictate
linh cam`inspiration; afflatus
linh dinh`magnificent
linh hon`soul; spirit
linh quynh`to bungle
linh thieng`to have supernatural power
linh tinh`presentiment, premonition#trivial, trifling
lip`to heal; to skin over
lit`litre; liter
liu`to repeat
lo`dozen#kiln; furnace; oven#loss#lot; portion (of land); batch#road; street#to come out; to burst forth#soot vase; jar; phial#to appear; to heave; to come into sight#to bother; to worry; to attend to#to dissemble; to ignore#to miss; to fail; to lose#to pretend not to know; to cut
lo buon`to be worried and sad
lo co`to hop (a popular game among Vietnamese children)
lo cot`lockhouse
lo dien`to show one's face
lo dit`(anat) anus
lo do`glassy; dull; lack-lustre
lo hoa tang`crematorium
lo ko`o hop
lo lang`ridiculous
lo lem`dirty
lo lieu`to make arrangement for; to contrive
lo mang`coarse; rude; abusive
lo mo`vague
lo so`anxious
lo tai`ear; ear-hole
lo trinh`itinerary; road; route
lo xo`spring
loa`dim#horn; megaphone#im#o dazzle#to dazzle
loa lo`aked#naked
loa xoa`(of hair) to be flowing#of hair) to be flowing
loac choac`unco-ordinated
loai`kind; gender ; specied#sort; category; gemos#to eliminate; to weed out
loai bo`to reject
loai tru`to exclude, to expel
loan`to be in disorder#to spread
loan bao`to announce; to make known
loan dam`incestuous
loan lac`trouble
loan luan`incestuous
loan thi`astigmatism
loan tri`to be deranged; to be mad
loang`to spread#watery; diluted; weak
loang thoang`vaguely
loanh quanh`to go around
loat`series
loc`(bot) bud#kind of deer#to dissect; to cut up#to filter ; to purify; to cleanse
loc loi`worldly-wise
loc lua`to choose carefully
loe`cupped, flaring#o bluff#o flash#to bluff
loe loet`flashy; gandy; tawdry#lashy; gandy; tawdry#smeared all over
loe toe`to tell tales, to peach
loet`(of wound) to be gaping
loi`convex; prominent#mistake; fault; error#to fail to keep#style; way; manner#path; way#to loosen; to do good to#to project; to tick out#to pull, to drag#to swim; to wade#word#profit; interest
loi choi`hopping
loi cuon`to draw along; to carry along
loi doi`experienced in life
loi dung`to benefit; to take advantage of
loi hua`promise; engagement; word
loi khuyen`counsel; advise; admonition
loi ngoi`to creep up, to crowl up
loi nhoi`to crawl
loi the`oath
loi thoi`out - of - date; out - model#untidy; careless; slovenly
loi toi`chain of iron
loi tua`reface; foreword
loi tuc`income; revenue
lom`deep-set; sunken (eyes)#very
lom chom`bristling; brushy
lom dom`spotted; speckled
lom giong`to nauseate
lon`(anat) vagina; cunt#(xem) heo#big; large#curl; ringlet; lock#stripe; chevron#to mistake; to confuse; to confound#too familiar; disrespectful
lon xon`confusion; disorder
long`cage#to rear; to bolt (of horse)#hair; fur; coat#heart; soul; mind#internode slang; cant#loose#parasol#thin; watery
long dan`popularity; public esteem
long heo`ig's tripes
long lang da thu`mel;#arbarous
long lanh`sparkling; glistening
long lay`luxurious; splendid
long long`high and large; immense
long may`eyebrows
long mi`eyelashes; cilia
long nao`camphor
long ngong`to be waiting for
long nhan`charity
long quyen`to abuse power
long song`iver-bed
long tot`indness; kindheart
long trong`solemn with ceremony
lop`bed; layer; stratum; coat#to cover; to roof#tyre; tire
lop lang`order
lot`(of colour) pale#_to fall into#to line (coat...),#to skin; to throw off
lot long`to be born
lot mat na`o unmask
lot o`dong tu. (of bird) to nest, to build a nest
lu`(nhu lu doan) Brigade#(nhu met lu) To be tired out#Glower, stare silenty and angrily at#Urn#gang; band; croud#spate; freshet#small jar#stone roller; iron roller#fuzzy; dim#ull - brained; dull - witted#xem ngot lu
lu diem`inn; hotel
lu doan`Brigade
lu doan truong`Brigadier
lu du`nhu lo do
lu hanh`travel
lu huong`Incense burner
lu khach`traveller
lu khu`Feel out of sorts, sicken for#nhu lu khu
lu khu lu khu`xem lu thu
lu lu`Be silent,be speechless
lu quan`Inn
lu thu`Inn accommodation, hotel accommodatin#nhu lo do
lu truong`Brigadier
lu xa`nhu lu diem
lua`Many a time, for long#ass; donkey; jackass#con lua#to cheat; to dupe; delude#bot) rice; paddy#fire#rank; class#litter; brook; farrow#silk#to blow in#to choose; to select; to pick out
lua binh`tu cu; nghia cu) Fine and sword, war, warfare
lua bip`Fool, dupe
lua chon`Select, choose,pick,sort
lua dan`War
lua dao`to defrawd; to swindle
lua doi`Trick onto obedience, trick into compliance#nhu doi lua
lua duc`Flame of passions
lua gat`Dupe, deceive
lua han`Fit of violent hatred, burning feud
lua la`nhu lo la
lua loc`Select and arrange
lua long`Lust, violent dessre
lua mi`heat
lua phinh`Wheedle, coax
lua rom`Straw fire; (b) suddden short blaze
lua thoc`ereals
lua tinh`The ardour of passions
lua trai`Camp-fire
lua tuoi`Age group
luan`Essay
luan an`thesis; dissertation
luan ban`nhu ban luan
luan chien`polemize
luan chung`data, facts (used to substantiate some theory), theoretical factual foundations
luan chuyen`to rotate
luan cong`Assess the merits, assess the achivements (of a community..)
luan cu`Foundation, basis, ground
luan cuong`thesis
luan de`subject of discussion
luan diem`theoretical poit
luan dieu`argument
luan giai`Interpret
luan lac`to decline
luan ly`orals; ethics
luan quan`hang on to#to dangle about; to hover about
luan thuong`Code of behaviour (feudal), moral principles
luan van`essay; composition
luat`law; rule; code; regulation
luat gia`lawyer
luat hinh`Criminal law
luat hoc`law studies
luat khoa`law
luat lao dong`aw of the labour union
luat le`law and practises (of a society)
luat phap`law
luat su`lawyer; barrister; advocate
luc`force; strength#oment; while#ime#hen#to search; to forage#green
luc bao`(Ngoc luc bao) Emerald
luc bat`sin-word verse followed by an eight-word distich metre,sin-eight-word distich metre
luc binh`(thuc) water hyacinth
luc buc`Bubble
luc ca nguyet`Semester
luc chien`(thuy quan luc chien) Marine
luc dao`(tu cu; nghia cu) Roads
luc dia`mainland; continent
luc dich`(tu cu; nghia cu) Corvee, toil of drawers of water and hewers of wood
luc dien`(toan) Hexahedron#(tu cu; nghia cu) Hefty peasant
luc duc`to disagree; to be in confliet
luc hoc`(ly') Dynamology
luc ke`Dynamometer
luc lac`Tintinnabulum (on a horse harness)#o swing;#o oscillate
luc loi`Forage, rummage, search thoroughly
luc luong`froce; strength#strong; burly
luc si`athlete
luc van`to interrogate; to examine
luc vi`The six tastes (sour, hot, salt, sweet, bitter, tasteless). six-compnet Galenic medicine is a tonic
luc xi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Prostitues' medical service (thoi thuoc phap)
lui`Get stunted, wither away#step backwards#urn back#to move back; to fall back#to slip a way
lui binh`Withdraw the troops, retreat
lui buoc`Yield, give way, make concessions
lui cui`Apply oneself strenuously to (some work)
lui hui`nhu lui hui
lui lai`Postpone, put off (one's departure.)
lui lui`Silently, in silence#Without fuss; unnoticed
lui thui`alone; lonely; lonesome
lui toi`Frequent
lum`Sunken#Swallow whole, bolt#grove#eaped
lum khum`(tieng dia phuong) nhu lom khom
lum lum`xem lum (lay)
lun`Short#be going out little by little (of a fire); be worn out by little little (of strength...)#dwarf; short#o subside; to sink; to settle; to delve
lun bai`to fall into ruin
lun chun`Undersized, diminutive#nhu lun chun
lun cun`Too short#Too short
lun doi`Till the end of one's life
lun mun`Mean
lun te`Unsightly dwarf, unsightly shoet
lun tit`Unusually dwarf, unsightly short
lun vun`rifling
lung`(nhu thung lung) Valley#(xem) thung #Badger#alf-way, half-done#lung lung (lay, y giam)) Nearly one's fill#Resound#ervade, diffuse#Scour#Very hard#back#xem thom lung
lung bat`Hunt down
lung bung`nhu lung bung#nhu lung bung#ear indistinctly because of tinkling ears#nhu lung tung
lung ca lung cung`xem lung cung (lay)
lung chung`Half-way,half-done#Toddle
lung cung`dissension; disagreement
lung da`(An lung da) Not to eat one's fill
lung danh`Win fame
lung doan`to corner; to monopolize
lung kha lung khung`xem lung khung (lay)
lung khung`Hesitate, dilly-dally, waver
lung lac`to corrupt
lung lang`Dangle, hang down loosely
lung lay`famous; celebrated#to begin to get loose; beshaky
lung lieng`Swing; dangle
lung linh`nhu long lanh
lung lo`Sluggish#pendent; hanging
lung lung`xem lung (lay)
lung nhung`Flaccid and tounh#Flaccid and wet
lung suc`Scour, rummage
lung thung`Too loose#nhu lung thung#walk with deliberate steps, stroll, amble
lung trong`(Nuoc mat lung trong) Eyes moistened with tears
lung tung`Drum rolls#In utter confusin, in utter disorder, higgdly-piggedly. seething extensively, in widespread effervescence#erplexed; embarrassed
lung tung beng`xem beng
lung von`capital
luoc`(tieng dia phuong) Grey#comb#to prune; to baste#to boil
luoc bi`Fine-toothed comb, small-tooth comb
luoc dich`Make a loose translation, translate summarily
luoc do`sketch; diagram
luoc khao`to examine summarily
luoc su`Summary history
luoc thao`(nhu thao luoc) Strategy, art of war
luoc thua`Large-tooth conb, dressing comb
luoc thuat`to relate briefly
luoi`[Be] lazy, [be] slothful#net#tongue#blade
luoi bieng`lazy; idle; insolent
luoi cau`Fish-hook
luoi dien`Grid
luoi ga`Tongue,reed#alve#vula
luoi guom`word
luoi khoan`bit
luoi le`bayonet
luoi liem`Sickle
luoi mat cao`Trellis
luoi nhen`obweb; spider's web
luoi quang`(ngu) Cast-net
luoi re`(ngu) Drag-net, trawl
luoi sat`Grille
luoi tinh`morous nets
luoi trai`Peak, visor (o mu)
luoi vay`(ngu) tunny-net; seine
luoi vet`(ngu) Dredge
luoi vot`Hoop-net
luom`to look askance; to scoul at#to pick up; to take up
luom buom`Ragged, shreded
luom lat`Gather here and there, pick up here there
luom luom`xem luom (lay)
luom nguyt`look askew and glace angrily at (someone), give (someone) a black look
luom nhuom`Bedraggled, dirty, filthy
luom thuom`Careless and casual
luon`Breast (of a bird, chicken), fillet (of fish). rib#eel (of boat)#eal#often#to pass through#to soar; to hover; to glide
luon cui`to crawl; to crouch; to creep
luon khuon`Drag on, drag one's feet
luon lach`Thread one's way
luon leo`crooked
luon lo`Wander about
luon loi`Worm one's way into for benefits
luon lot`nhu luon loi
luon luon`Always, incessantly, as a rule
luon mieng`To talk incessantly
luon the`nhu luon
luon tien`nhu tien the
luong`Bed#Measure#athom#eceive, cheat, play a confidence trick on, swindle#Rotten, decayed#jet#quantity#tael#salary; pay; wage
luong bong`salary, wages, pay (noi chung)
luong ca`Generosity
luong chiet`(ly') Birefringent
luong cu`(ddo^.ng) Amphibian
luong cuc`(ly') Bipolar, dipolar, twopole
luong cuong`bewildered; abashed
luong dan`ordinary citizen, civilian
luong dien`lectric current
luong dong`(tu cu; nghia cu) Pillar marriage
luong duyen`Happy marriage
luong gat`Deceive, fool, dupe
luong giac`(toan) Trigonometry
luong hinh`Dimorphic, dimorphous
luong huong`(tu cu; nghia cu, khau ngu) nhu luong bong
luong kho`dry provisions
luong lach`Narrow passage (of rivers, harbours)
luong lu`to hesitate; to waver
luong mua`Rainfall
luong nang`nhu luong tri
luong nghi`(tu cu; nghia cu) Heaven and earth (in chinese philosophy)
luong phan`Dichotonal, dichtomous
luong quyen`check-bones
luong tam`conscience
luong the`nhu luong cu
luong thien`honest; good
luong thu`to forgive; to excuse
luong thuc`foods; rations; provisions
luong tien`Convenient both ways
luong tinh`(sinh hoc) Hermaphrodite#Pardon out of sympathy
luong tri`Sense of right and wrong; right senses
luong tu`(ly') Quantum#Hesitate, waver, be of two minds
luong tu hoa`(ly') Quantify
luong tu tuong`current of ideas
luong tuoi`Past one's youth
luong vien che`Bicameralism
luong vien che do`(nhu luong vien) Bicameralism
luong vuong`Hampered, hindered (in one's movement)
luong y`Galenic physician, herbalist
luot`Be lost in#time; turn#to glide; to graze
luot buot`nhu luot thuot
luot la`Silks (noi khai quat)
luot muot`Soaking wet#it dung) nhu suot muot
luot thuot`Flowing, trailing#nhu luot thuot
luot van`(the) Water-skiing
lup xup`low
lut`Husked (noi ve gao)#flood; inundation#blunt; dull
lut dau`(tieng dia phuong) Be up to the ears
lut loi`flood, inundation (noi khai quat). flooded,inundated
luu`(bot) pomegranate#to detain; to keep
luu ban`Repeat a class
luu cau`(tu cu; nghia cu) Jade-inlaid sword
luu chieu`Copyright deposit
luu chuyen`Circulation, turnover
luu cuu`Long-standing
luu dan`grenade
luu dang`Live a wandering life
luu danh`to leave a good name
luu day`o exile; to banish; to deport
luu dong`mobile; ambulatory
luu dung`(khau ngu) nhu luu dung#Keep for use, keep in office (from a former regime)
luu hanh`to circulate
luu hoa`Vulcanize
luu hoang`Sulphur
luu hoc sinh`Student learning abroad
luu huyet`(it dung) Shed blood
luu huynh`nhu luu hoang
luu lac`to drift
luu lang`Vagrant
luu loat`Fluent, smooth and ready
luu luyen`to be attached to
luu manh`scoundred
luu nhiem`continue [in office], elect for a second term, re-elect
luu niem`Keep for the sake of (the giver...)
luu nien`perennial
luu phao`Howitzer, short-barrel mortar
luu tam`to pay attention; to take notice
luu thong`traffic; circulation
luu tru`Keep as archives#Reside temporarily
luu tru vien`Archvist
luu truyen`Hand down, pass by tradition
luu vong`in exile
luu vuc`barin; valley
luu y`pay attention to
luy`(van chuong,tu cu; nghia cu) Tear#isfortune#rouble (annoy) for help#rampart
luy giam`Degressive
luy thua`(toan) Power
luy tien`progressive; graduated
luyen`long for, be reluctant to part with (to leave)#to train; to drill
luyen ai`love; romance
luyen dan`Alchemy
luyen kim`Metallurgy
luyen tap`Train, drill, coach
luyen thi`o prepar for examinations
luyen tiec`longingly remember
ly`1 cup; glass#tiny bit; milimeter#reason; ground
ly biet`o part; to separate
ly boi`arting cup
ly di`o divorce
ly do`ause; reason; argument
ly giai`o comprehend
ly hoa`hysics and chemistry
ly huong`o leave one's native land
ly lich`urriculum vitae
ly luan`o reason; to argue
ly tam`entrifugal
ly tan`cattered
ly thuyet`heory
ly tri`eason; faculty of reasoning
ly tuong`deal
ma`funeral#ghost; devil; spirit#here#horse#code;cipher#varnish; showy appearance#mother ; mama; mama#centella#cheek #rise seeding #to plate#tomb; grave
ma bac`ilverplated
ma ca`to bargain; to haggle
ma ca bong`vagrand; vagabon
ma ca rong`vampire
ma co`imp; pander; procurer
ma dao`fair
ma dien`to electroplate
ma dut`iesel oil
ma hoa`to code
ma ket`odel
ma lem`begrimed, bedaubed, soiled
ma luc`extraodinary power#horse-power
ma men`he demon of drunkeness
ma nao`agate
ma phu`groom; stableman; ostlen
ma quy`ghosts and devil
ma tau`scimitar; matchet
ma thuong`mmediately
ma tuy`narcotic; drug
ma vang`o glid
mac`busy; occupied; engaged#to suspend; to hang up; to sling#scimitar#screen ; curtain#to dress; to clothe; to wear; to put on
mac cam`complex
mac co`to be ashamed
mac dau`although; though; despite of
mac du`though, although
mac lua`to be trapped
mac niem`to meditate on a dead person
mac no`to be in debt;to involte oneself in debt
mac suc`without restraint, freely
mach`pulse#to denounce; to expose#to sneak; to tell tales
mach lac`cohesion; clearness; cohorency
mach mau`blood vessel
mach nha`malt
mai`carapace. spade#roof#hen; fermale#to become absorbed; to be busy with#to whet ; to sharpen
mai cheo`ar
mai dam`to prostitute onself
mai hien`veranda; porch roof
mai hoa`(bird) red munia
mai mai`forever ; forever and forever#leaden
mai miet`to be absorbed in; to devote oneself to
mai moi`match-maker
mai phuc`to ambush; to lie in ambush
mai sau`in the future
mai tang`to bury; to inter ; to entomb
mai toc`hair
mam`(bot) bud; germ seed#salted fish#tray; salver; waiter 
mam non`hope
man`area; region. side (of a boat)#curtain; screen. mosquito-net#false#plum-tree#salt; salty#to expire; to come to and end
man anh`cinema screen
man bac`silver screen, pictures
man can`diligent; painstaking
man di`savage, bear barous
man mac`vague; immense
man me`finger
man nguyen`content; satisfied
man nong`warm, heartfelt
man ro`barbarous, savage
man tra`frandulent
mang`(anat) membrane; web#to interest in#bamboo shoot#piece#to carry; to wear#gills ; branchiak#to darn#to hang up#spout; gutter #to scold; to reprove
mang bac`ad destiny
mang cau`(Bot) custard-apple
mang cut`Mangosteen#he name and the shape of this fruit do not look attractive to those who first see it. A mangosteen is as big as a tennis ball and has the dark violet and rough skin. Yet, when peeling off the upper part of the fruit with a small sharp knife and lifting the upper part off, you can see the transparent white pulp inside arranged in equal segments. Just lifting segment by segment of such transparent white pulp to the mouth, you can imagine of having a light and pure refreshment with an easily acceptable little sour taste lingering in your mouth
mang do`in#andolin
mang luoi`network
mang mang`dimly; vaguely
mang mo`body's side, flank
mang nhen`coburb
mang nhi`ear-drum
mang tay`asparagus.
mang tieng`to suffer a bad reputation
mang trinh`hymen
mang xa`python
manh`bamboo screen, blind#fine, thin#piece#strong; robust; drastic
manh dan`strong forceful; forcible
manh khoe`tinh tu. healthy; athletic
manh liet`violent; vehement; furious durming
manh loi`trick; dodge
manh mai`slender
manh moi`clue
manh nha`germ; sprout
manh tam`to intend to; to mean to
manh thu`wild beast
mao`comb; crest (of bird)
mao hiem`to adventure; to brave danger
mao nhan`to assume falsely
mao quan`capillary
map`fat;stout; plump
map map`corpulent, clubly, portly
map may`to move lightly and quickly
map me`nearly reach
map mo`dim; loose; figgy; vague#to be uneven
mat`bird-mite#very foor#cool ; fresh#eye. eye#face#urface#right#honey#secret#to lose#to die; to vanish
mat ca`(Anat) ankle
mat cap`stolen
mat cua`sawdust
mat day`Ill-bred; unmanerly
mat do`density
mat hang`line
mat khu`ecret zone
mat lenh`secret order
mat luoi`esh
mat ma`code, cipher
mat mia`olasses
mat mua`to have a poor crop
mat na`mask. lot mat na cua nguoi nao to unmark someone
mat ngu`lack of sleep
mat ong`honey
mat phang`plane
mat sat`to disparage; to criticize too severely
mat tich`missing
mat tien`ront
mat tran`front; battle front
mat trang`moon
mat tri`to lose one's reason
mat van`ill lick, bed luck
mat vu`secret service
mau`acre. model; pattern; specimen#blood#colour#notch; tooth#quickly; fast; rapidly
mau chong`rapid, prompt, quick
mau dich`trade; commerce
mau don`peony
mau giao`motherly instruction
mau he`matriarchy
mau ma`ode, model; style
mau man`agile; brisk; active
mau me`shonry; unctuous
mau mo`pick; fat (land)
mau sac`colour
mau so`denominator
mau tham`cupidity
mau thuan`to contradict
may`clould#Bot) rattan#lucky; fortunate#to sen; to stitch#machine; engine. internal-combustion engine#you
may chu`typewriter
may giat`washer ; washing-machine
may in`printing-machine; printing-press
may ma`uckily; fortunetely
may man`lucky, fortunate
may san`ready-made
may tinh`calculator, arithmoneter
me`A child's word for mother (like mom) tamarind#batten#chipped#hand#mother#to cut off#edge; border#to faint; to lose consciousness#to dote upon; to be carry about
me lo`labyrinth
me ly`ndistinct; obscure
me man`unconscious, faint
me me`all over
me muoi`dull-witted
me sang`delirious
me tin`superstitious
mem`soft; flaccid; tender ; flexible
mem mong`flexible; compliant;supple
men`blanket#enamed#ferment#to love; to like; to be fond of
men phuc`to love and admire
men su`laze; varnish; enamel
men tinh`assion, emotion
menh mong`vast; immense; spacious
meo`Deformed; distorted; out of shape#cat#mouldy#perished#ruse; expedvent; rule
mep`edge; border ; margin
met`metre; meter#to strop; to set (razor)#to meak, to tell tales#pale#tired; fatigued; weary 
met moi`tired
meu`to twist the face
mi`Chinese noodles
mi dan`demagogic
mi mat`yelid
mia`sugar-cane
mia mai`ironical
mien`Vermicelli made of cassava#Made from a kind of tuber plant familiar to cassava, Mien threads are very long and tough. When being served, these long tiny flour threads are cut into smaller pieces.This kind of cassava vermicelli is used to make several different dishes. The most popular is Mien Ga (chicken cassava vermicelli), Mien Bo (beef cassava vermicelli) and Mien Luon (eel cassava vermicelli). Cassava vermicelli is also used for different dishes stirred in fat such as Mien Xao Thit (vermicelli and pork stirred in fat), Mien Xao Long Ga (vermicelli and chicken tripe stirred in fat) and Mien Xao Cua (vermicelli and sea crab meat stirred in fat)#region; district; climate#to exempt; to excuse; to forgive
mien cuong`unwillingly ; reductant; grudging
mien dich`to immunize#immune
mien man`continual; uncreasing; never -ending
mien phi`free of charge
mien thu`to forgive, to pardon
mien thue`exempt from taxes
mien tru`to exempt,to dispense
mieng`flagment; piece; bit#mouth
mieng luoi`to be very talkative
miet mai`to give oneself upto; to devote oneself to
mieu`temple; shrine
mieu ta`to describe; to define
mim`to tighten
mim cuoi`to smile
min`mine; dynamite
minh`body. oneself
minh bach`clear ; explicit; evident
minh chau`orient peard
minh hoa`to illustrate
minh man`perpicacious; clairvoyant
mistake`oting; forgetful
mit`(Bot)jack-tree#xem toi mit
mit mo`Dark, indistinct
mit mu`Dim and distand
mit mung`Dim and immense
mit xoai`(it dung) Nobody
mo`Abutent (of a bridge)#Base of the areca leaf petiole.#thuc vat) Spathe#ountain worship man#I, me#hat's-his (-her, -its) -name, what -d' you call-him (-her, -it...)#Maternal uncle's wife, aunt#andarin's young son's wife#ove, darling (used y husband when addressing wife)#anma, mummy, mother.#used for addressing a daughter-in-law). you#Mine#beak; bill; spout#Wooden bell, bamboo tocsin#illage herald (belonging to the lowest social class, in former times)#THE EXTRAORDINARY SOUNDS OF TOCSIN: Tocsin, drum and horn are familiar musical instruments in Vietnam's countryside. However, tocsin is the most versatile with its extraordinary sounds, depending on whether it is found: in the forest, where it is used as a musical instrument, in the village, as a warning signal, or in the pagoda where it is essential for Buddhist rituals. In the village watch towerm, there used to be many wooden fish clappers. Depending on the rhythm of the beating, the villagers could be informed of different events: Festivities, thieves, fire, or strengthening dikes. In the highlands, small wooden rattles are attached to the necks of buffaloes to help their owners distinguish their cattle. These tocsins are oval-shaped ones. Their lengths and thickness also differ. Hence the peculiar sounds made by the buffaloes. In the pagoda, Mo Qua is used to accompany the prayers of Buddhist bronzes. Tocsins are made from different materials Some are made from the roots of a bamboo tree (widely used by the village crier), or from the trunk of an old bamboo (used in the watch tower because of the strident sound it produces).+As a result of years of study, Ta Tham, an elderly musician, managed to develop a new musical instrument comprising a series of tocsins. Thus this concert is composed of four kinds of tocsin: Ong, Qua, Trac and Thanh, meaning respectively tube, fruit, teak and sound. Trac tocsins, made of hard wood (such as teak or steel wood) and placed to the left, can produce clear and light sounds.The musician can use tube tocsins and teak tocsins to reflect exclusive sounds hitherto unknown in all kinds of tocsin. They can mock the sounds made by woodpeckers, partridges, frogs, insects or horse hooves. Since the cluster of tocsins was born, it has become highly valued by many art troupes nationwide. It has been awarded a prize by the Institute of Music under the Ministry of Culture and Information#apricot-tree#to dream#cot#to talk in one's sleep#dim; blear ; blurred; opaque#fat; grease#mound#nhu mo#to grope; to fumble#to open#to operate;to dissect#tomb; grave
mo ac`End of the sternum.#dia phuong) Fontanel, fontanelle
mo am`Dubious
mo ao`Ethereal; vaporous
mo bia`ombstone; gravestond
mo binh`(tu cu) recruit soliders
mo cap`(ky thuat) Vice
mo chai`Pig's omental fat
mo chi`tombstone, headstone
mo co`(thong tuc) Type very slowly with two fingers#Be side oneself with joy
mo coi`to be orphaned
mo danh`Honnour the fame of be a great admirer of
mo dao`Devout
mo dau`to begin, to initiate, to start
mo dia`graveyard
mo duc`Opaque
mo duong`Initiate, pave the way for
mo ga`Chicken fat coloured
mo han`Soldering-iron
mo hang`Make the first purchase in the day (of something) from someone#ive as a new year's gift; handsel
mo hinh`clay model
mo ho`vague; indefinite; equivocal
mo hoc`(sinh vat) Histology
mo hoi`sweat; perspiration
mo hong`Soot
mo khoet`(thong tuc) Person who eats often
mo la`Pig's side fat
mo ma`(some dead person's) lifetime#Graves, tombs
mo mam`Grope about for a long time, look for a long time
mo man`to raise the curtain, to begin
mo mang`See vaguely in adream#ream, be a dreamer#to develop; to expand; to enlarge
mo mao`Begin, star, prelude
mo mat`Be better off#to open eyes to
mo may`Strat an engine#nghia bong) Start
mo mieng`to open one's mouth to speak
mo mit`Dark
mo mo`xem mo (lay)#xem mo (lay)
mo mong`(tu cu) nhu mo mang#dreamy
mo neo`anchor. anchor
mo nhat`(dia phuong) Snipe (chim)
mo nuoc`Liquide lard
mo pham`model, pattern
mo phan`Pig's nape fat#grave
mo phat`Buddha bless you#lory to buddha!
mo phong`to imitate
mo rong`Enlarge, extend, expand
mo sang`Dawn, daybreak
mo ta`to describe
mo te`Chang biet mo te gi ca#o know anything at all; not to make head or tail of something
mo then`Mountain sorceers
mo tiec`Give a banquet, banquet
mo to`otor#otor-cycle, motor-bike
mo toa`(tu cu) Usher, bailiff
mo toang`Open (the door) wide
mo tuong`to dream
mo uoc`to dream of
mo vang`old-mine
mo vit`speculum
mo xac`(y hoc) Make a autopsy
mo xe`to operate; to dissect; to anatomise
moc`Cay moc# tree#ood#lain, unlacquered, unvarished, unbleached#hield#Landmark#ould. Moudy#ould-green mould-gray#ook; crotchet; clasp#o hook; to seize; to pick#to shoot;to grow; to rise
moc ban`Wood-block
moc duc`(tu cu) Clean joss statues
moc gia`(tu cu) Cangue
moc mac`simple; natural
moc mam`Bud, sprout
moc meo`Mould all over, thickly covered with mould
moc nhi`Jew's ear
moc rang`to teeth; to grow teeth
moc sat`rampon; crampiron
moc sung`Nguoi chong moc sung# cuckold
moc tac`(thuc vat) Horsetail.  moc tinh#upiter
moc thech`Gray with mould
moc xi`(thong tuc) Nothinng at all
moi`Weary, tired#ickening for some illness, indisposed#all; every#bait; lure; decoy#each; every#lip#ladle#new; fresh; recent#termite; white ant#cause#to dig#to invite#xem ca moi
moi chai`Entice, decoy
moi cung`(khau ngu) Brand-new
moi day`Most recently, lately
moi gieng`Rule of conduct to be followed
moi gioi`agency; medium ; intermediatery
moi hang`Customer, patron
moi hay`nhu cho hay
moi la`Extraordinary, unusual, unheard-of
moi lai`Act as a go-between, act as a matchmakers
moi manh`nhu manh moi
moi mat`For a weary lonhg time
moi me`Fresh
moi met`Tired, weary
moi moc`Invite with warmth, invite with insistence#Rummage, forage (to extract)#xpose (someone's defects...), run down
moi mot`Each#lone, by oneself#ore ... and more ...;... -er and ... -er
moi nguyen`Brand-news
moi ro`Savage
moi roi`In most recent days
moi sinh`Evironment
moi tinh`Brand-new#Love
moi toanh`(thong tuc) Brand-new
moi toi`(khau ngu) None the less
moi truong`Enviroment, medium
moi truong hoc`Mesology
mom`(it dung) Coax, bladish#Feed from one's mouth (beak)#ummarily as a trial#Mouth#River bank#it dung) Ulterior motive#Smooth with one's fingers#tart (someone speaking)#Top, peak#rocess (of a bone)#snout; muzzle
mom mep`Tongue#ift of the gad
mom mieng`Mouth, tongue
mon`Tiny, very small#umble, mean, poor#band, gang, elique#tem; article; dish#ood course#to wear
mon bai`danh tu. licence
mon de`follower; disciple
mon do`(tu cu) Disciple
mon ha`[influential famyly's] underling
mon hoc`subject
mon men`Approach with small step, approach gradually
mon moi`Wear out gradually, decline gradually.#er youth had gradually declined and her looks had lost their freshness
mon mot`Ro mon mot#o hear very distinctly
mon phai`school; sect
mon sinh`(tu cu) Disciple
mon tron`to fondle; to caress
mong`(used on front of dates of a lunnar month's firt ten days) -st, -nd, -rd,#h#dia phuong) nhu mao#Blind fortune-teller's guide#Partial rainbow, primary rainbow, it will shine, white rainbow, it will rain#prout#thong tuc) Person, head#Succlent#wollen, bursting (with a liquid)#Teal (chim)#ad-fly#van chuong) nhu mong#buttock; rump#dream#tenon#thin; slender; slim#to hope; to expect and desire
mong ao`Visionary, unreal
mong cho`nhu mong doi
mong dinh`Very thin, flimsy
mong dit`Rear
mong doi`Wait for long, long for news from home
mong du`somnambulistic; sleep-walking
mong lung`Misty, foggy
mong manh`Fragile#Very thin#ail, fragile#faint; slender; slim
mong mat`(giai phau) Iris
mong menh`Limitless, immense
mong mi`dream
mong moc`xem moc (lay)
mong moi`Long for, expect#Table-telling, tale-bearing, peaching
mong mong`xem mong (lay)#xem mong (lay)
mong muoi`Foggy, misty, hazy
mong muon`Want, desire
mong ngong`Look forwasd to, expect
mong nho`Miss
mong quanh`desent
mong tai`Eavesdropping
mong tanh`very thin
mong tay`inger-nail
mong tinh`Nocturnal emission, wet dream
mong toi`Malabar nightshade
mong trieu`Omen seen in a dream
mong tuong`Nurture a fatastic dream#antastic dream
mong uoc`Eagerly wish for, eagerly long for
mong vuot`laws
mop`(dia phuong) xem mac mop#Sunken
mop mep`Baddly dented
mot`one#style;fashion#to glean (corn)#wood-borer; woodeater
mot chap`The eleventh and the twelfth lunar months; the end of the year
mot chieu`One-way
mot choc`An instant
mot chut`a little; moment; instant; a taste
mot com`Useless outh, parasite
mot dan`Extortioner (noi ve qua ai thoi truoc)
mot dao`For a time, for some time
mot doi`A few, some#One's life-time
mot gia`Veteran extortioner of a district chief
mot hai`One or two, a few#esolutely
mot hoi`At a stretch, at adraught
mot it`A little bit, a tiny bit, a dash
mot khi`Once
mot lan`Once
mot leo`At a stretch, at one sitting
mot long`Whole-heartedly
mot luc`A moment, an instant
mot mach`At a stretch, at a one sitting
mot mai`One day, one of these days
mot sach`Bookworm, bookish person
mot vai`a few, several, some
mot xac`(thong tuc) Rot
mu`(Med) pus; matter#Old hag#blind; eyeless ; sightless#carapace; tortoise-shell#hat; cap; bonnet
mu cat`Sun-helmet
mu chao mao`Garrison-cap
mu chu`Illiterate
mu coi`Sun-helmet
mu khoi`Distan and misty, mistily distant
mu loa`Blind
mu mit`dark; sombre; uncertain
mu mo`Confusing, vague
mu quang`Blind
mu suong`Foggy
mu tit`[Be] Completely unaware, [be] utterly ignorant
mua`In excess, more than one can manage (xem bo mua, thua mua)#rain#season; time; tide#to buy; to purchase; to get#to dance; to brandish (a weapon)#to vomit; to spew up (food)
mua ban`to trade, to buy and sell
mua bay`Spray-like rain
mua bui`Small drizzling rain
mua buon`Buy whosale
mua chuoc`to bribe; to buy over
mua dam`Lasting rain
mua dong`Rain-storm
mua duong`Go by a longer way than asual
mua giat`(y hoc) Chorea, st. Vitus dance
mua gio`Rain and wind, unfavourable weather#ventful, full of vicissitudes, full of ups and downs
mua le`Buy [by] retail
mua lu`Diluvial rain (in the mountains, which provokes floods in the plains)
mua mang`danh tu. crop; harvest
mua mat`Save (someone's) face, pay due consideration to (someone's) face#Very hard, exhausting
mua may`Fuss about (ina ridiculous fashion)#nhu mua may
mua mep`Waggle one's tongue (for show)
mua mo`(thong tuc) nhu mua mep
mua moc`(van chuong) Boon
mua ngau`Lasting rain in the seventh lunar month
mua nguon`Heavy rain at river sources
mua rao`Shower
mua roi`Puppetry, art of puppet-showing, marionnette-show, puppet-play#ua roi nuoc (water puppetry) is common throughout the world. Water puppetry was developed in lake and pond-rich areas in the Red River Delta The surface of water serves as the stage while spectators sit at the water's edge. The puppeteers both male and female stand waist-deep in the water to manipulate the puppets making them move about and even dance on the surface of the water. The water serves not only to hide the puppeteers and the puppets' strings but also to create a trembling stage full of reflection, while providing natural amplification for singing puppeteers accompanied by percussion music and fire crackers. Every puppet is a piece of real folk sculpture. It is made of wood, painted with waterproof lacquer. The prominent character is buffoon Teu with a plump body and a humorous smile. When the curtain is raised, the merry, arch Teu enters onto the stage and introduces the play. A considerable repertoire of traditional water puppet plays still get a big hand from the audience They include Teu Dance, Buffalo Fighting, Duck Tender Chasing Fox and Chess Playing
mua sam`to go shopping
mua si`nhu mua buon
mua viec`Bring upon oneself more trouble (by doing unnescessary extra work)
mua vo`o shadow-box
mua vu`Farming season
mua vui`to amuse oneself
muc`Head, section#tem#olumn#otten, decaying, decayed#Level, degree, measure, extent, standard#Scoop, ladle soup out into bowls#cuttle-fish#ink
muc dich`mark; goal; purpose
muc dich luan`(triet hoc) Finalism
muc do`Set standard, set level, set measure (for action)
muc dong`Herdsman#herds-man
muc kich`(tu cu) Gig-lamps, spec#to eye, to witness
muc kinh`gig-lamps, specs
muc luc`contents, list
muc nat`Rotten, decayed#orrupt
muc song`Living standard
muc su`Pastor, clergyman
muc suc`(tu cu) Grazing animals
muc tau`Indian ink
muc thuoc`Examplary, model-setting, regular
muc tieu`aim; object; target
muc truong`(it dung) grazing-ground, grazing-land
muc tu`(tu cu) Herdsman#Entry (in a dictionary)
mui`Knot (of a narrow band of cloth or silk)#egment, section (of a fruit like orange)#Left over (as odds and ends, leavings)#nose; conk#smell; odour; scent#top; roof; hood (of car)#xem mui long
mui dat`Point, cape
mui gi`Mere nothing; nothing at all; not much
mui gio`Time-belt
mui giui`Point where an attack is focussed, focus (of an attack)
mui long`Be moved, feel pity, feel compassion
mui me`Taste (of food...)
mui me gi`nhu mui gi (nghia manh hon)
mui nhon`Key
mui soa`ankerehief
mui tau`(thuc vat) Eryngium
mui tay`(thuc vat) Parsley
mui ten`arrow. arrowhead
mui tiem`(y hoc) Injection, shot
mui vi`taste, seent
mum`Gnaw, chew with incisors#Swell one's cheeks while tightening one's lips
mum mim`Chubby, plump (noi ve tre em)#xem mim#xem mim (lay)
mum mup`xem mup (lay)
mun`Acne, pimple, black-head#ustule, eruption#it, piece#hild (of a small family)#Ash#bony#Decayed#Humus#ust, particle
mun nhot`Furuncle; boil
mung`(dia phuong) Mosquito-net#Small basket#mall lacquer-caulked bamboo boat#Turn into an abscess; gather#to rejoyce; to congratulate#glad; happy
mung cong`Make merry (on the occasion of some success)
mung quynh`Be overjoyed; bubble over with joy
mung ro`Happy, pleased, glad
mung tham`Feel a secret joy; rejoice inwardly
mung tuoi`Express New Year's Day wishes (to someone for being a year older)
muoi`(denoting the tens)#bout ten#Ripe#Soot#Ten#mosquito#nhu moi Ladle#salt
muoi hai`A dozen
muoi lam`Fifteen or so
muoi mat`Brazely entreat (someone for something)
muoi tieu`Pepper and salt#epper-and-salt hair
muoi vung`Sesame and salt (roasted and crushed)
muom`(thuc vat) Bachang mango.#dong vat) Long-horned grasshopper
muon`late; tardy#nhu van Ten thousand#to borrow#to hire; to rent#want ; will; to wish for; to desire
muon co`Use as pretext, pretext
muon dam`Ten thousand miles; a great distance, very far away
muon dan`(tu cu) The whole people
muon man`Having children very late in life
muon mang`Late in life
muon muot`xem muot (lay)
muon tieng`Under the pretence of, under the pretence that
muong`(dia phuong) Spoon#(dia phuong) cung nhu hoa muong Funnel#it dung) Rau muong (noi tat)#(ket hop han che) Quadruped, animal#Hound#Ditch#Mountain village#Senna, cassia (cay)
muop`Loopah, luffa
muop dang`Balsam-aple, la-kwa
muot`Glossy#Snowy (noi ve nuoc da)#Sweat profusely, perspire abundantly
muot ma`Velvety
mup`Plump, buxom#Tender cabbage shoot
mup mip`Very plump, very chubby
mut`(dia phuong) Boil#Jam, sugar-coated fruit, sugar - preserved fruit#Suck
mut keo`Confectionery
muu`scheme; plot; conspiracy
muu cau`See to, seek
muu chuoc`Trick, device, expedient
muu co`Suitable stratagem, timely trick
muu do`Intrigue; machination#ry to obtain by intrigue
muu hai`Attempt, design, attempt to harm
muu ke`Scheme, device
muu luoc`Plan and strategy
muu meo`Deceptive trick, confidence trick
muu mo`Design
muu phan`Design to betray, plot treason
muu sat`Attempt (on someone's life), attempted assassination
muu si`(tu cu) Strategist-adviser, adviser, mastermind
muu sinh`to make one's living
muu su`See to (something), make careful arrngements for#dvise (someone) on how to do (something), mastermind
muu tinh`Premeditate
muu toan`Attempt; contrive
muu tri`Clever and resourceful mind
my le`eautiful; lovely
my nu`retty girl
my thuat`rt
my vi`elicacies
my y`ood intention
na`(tu cu) Mother#Silk strech (on a river bank)#dia phuong) Well!#et's, let#cross-bow; arbalest#short time; short while#creel#to hunt for#to tole; to bring#custard-apple
na cao su`catapult
na dong`Middle-aged matron.
na mo`cung nhu nam mo Glory to (budha)
na na`rather like; rather similar
na pan`apalm
na tri`odium
nac`Reek of#ntirely consist of, be completely pervaded with, taste wholly of#lean#step; stair ; step; turn
nac cut`nhu nac
nac danh`Anonymous
nac ne`Hawk-moth
nac no`Professional dun[-ner], professional debt-collector#ulgar-mannered termagent, vixen
nach`armpit
nach la`bot) axil
nai`Salt-marsh.#tu cu) nhu ne Mind#deer#female of certain animals #small bag#to mind#to insists#to tie#jockey
nai bao`Not flinch from, defy
nai ep`Force with entreaties
nai lung`nai lung lam viec to toil; to work hard
nai ni`to beg; to insist; to adjure
nai nit`Adjust one's clothes securely
nai se`Sow (which has had youngs)
nai xin`Beseech
nam`Small wine bottle#burnt#handful#to inlay#mushroom; fungus#south#man; male#to hold; to grasp; to seize#to lie down#year#five
nam ba`Several some
nam ban cau`Southern hemisphere
nam bay`Small amount, amount between five and seven
nam bep`(dia phuong) Be confined, be in childbed, lie in#Lie up, be laid low
nam bo`Southern part (of an area)
nam cao`(nhac) Tenor
nam chac`nhu nam vung
nam cham`magnet
nam co`Lie curled up
nam cuc`antarctic pile; south pole
nam dai`Lie stretched out stretch [oneself] out#dle away one's time lying on one's bed
nam giao`Heaven-worshipping ceremony (thoi phong kien)
nam gioi`Male sex, the sterner sex
nam giu`Hold
nam hoc`sehoot-year
nam i`Squat, stay on at a place and refuse to move
nam kenh`Sprawl
nam kha`Empty dream
nam khan`Be at a loose end
nam khenh`Sprawl
nam khoeo`cung nhu nam queo, nam co, nam khan
nam khong`Be single, remain single
nam kia`The year before last
nam mat troi`Solar year
nam me`to have a dream
nam men`Yeast
nam meo`Be at a loose end
nam mo`Mound (on a grave), grave#nhu na mo#nhu nam me
nam moi`New year
nam mong`nhu nam me
nam mot`Every year, yearly (noi ve su sinh de cua phu nu)
nam muoi`ifty
nam nam`Every year, yearly
nam nap`Flocking, in dense crowds
nam ngang`Horizontal
nam ngoai`Last year
nam ngu`to lie dormant
nam nhi`Son, man
nam nhuan`Leap year
nam noi`nhu nam bep
nam nu`male and female
nam phong`South wind
nam phuc`Traditional clothing (of Vietnam)
nam queo`nhu nam khoeo
nam sinh`Boy pupil, boy student
nam tay`Fist
nam thang`The time
nam thien van`Sidereal year
nam thuot`Lie stretched out
nam tien`(tu cu) Southward march
nam tinh`male sex
nam tram`(nhac) Bass
nam trang`Man's clothing
nam trung`(nhac) Baritone
nam tu`(tu cu) Man, male
nam tuoc`Baron
nam tuoi`Lunar year bearing the Earthly Branch of one's birth year
nam uon`Sprawl idly; idle away one's time in bed
nam va`to throw temper tantrum
nam vien`Be hospitalized
nam vo`nhu na mo
nam vung`Live and carry out underground activities in enemy-occupied zones#cung nhu nam chac Have a thorough grasp of
nam xoai`Lie at full length, lie fully stretched out
nam xua`Long ago
nam xuong`Die#bones ; repains
nan`Barren, sterile#Knead, model#queeze out#Linger, stay on#danger; calamity; disaster#difficult#discouraged; despondent#to mould; to model; to set
nan bop`Massage
nan chi`nhu nan
nan chuyen`Make up a story
nan dan`(it dung) Victims, sasualty (of a calamity..)
nan dien`(dien) Redress the current
nan gan`(khau ngu) Sound feel the pulse
nan giai`hard; difficult to solve
nan hoa`Spoke
nan long`nhu nan
nan nhan`victim
nan ni`Entreat#nhu nan ni
nan not`Write painstakingly
nan oc`Cudgel one's brains long and hard
nan y`Difficult to cure
nang`(Anat) follicle; follicule#(dia phuong) nhu nung#(thong tuc) Swipe, steal#Frequently, often, many a time#fork#crutch#heavy; ponderous; weighty#nhu nung#she; her #sunny#to raise
nang bac`Raise (salaries, wages) to a higher scale
nang bung`Heaviness in the stomach; heavy tummy
nang can`Inveterate#Weigh heavy
nang cao`Lift, raise, enhance
nang cap`Upgrade
nang coc`Raise one's glaass
nang dau`Have a slight headache#daughter-in-law
nang do`to help; to support
nang dong`Dynamic
nang ganh`Carry a burden (of love, of responsibility, of family..)
nang giac`Take great care of (elderly people)
nang hau`young concubine
nang hoi`Have a strong breath
nang lai`At a high rate of interest
nang loi`o use strong words
nang long`Feel deep concern in, pay great attention to
nang luc`ability; capacity; efficiency
nang luong`energy
nang mat`Make (pull, put on. wear) a long face
nang mua`Life's hardships.#o face alone the life's hardships in a strange land
nang mui`strong, fetid
nang nac`Ask with annoying insistence
nang ne`heavy ; lumbering
nang nhoc`hard
nang niu`Take a loving care of
nang no`ditigent, zealous
nang noi`nhu nang (noi chung)
nang rao`dry, sunny
nang suat`productivity ; capacity
nang tai`hard of hearing
nang tay`Weigh heavy enough#e tough with
nang tho`Poetic muse, poetic inspiration, the muse
nang tien`fairy
nang tinh`o be deeply in love with
nang trich`Very heavy
nang triu`Overloaded, overburdened; laden with
nang via`Nguoi nang via# bird of ill-omen
nanh`Envy#Tilt on one side (noi ve tau thuyen)#tusk
nanh ac`cruel, wicked
nanh noc`Cruel, fiendish person
nanh sau`quincunx
nanh vuot`tusk and clutch; clutches
nao`(Anat) brain; cerebrum#(tu cu; van chuong) nhu nao#Raise an uproar, raise a din#to scrape; to clean; to clean out#which#ny
nao bat`Cymbals
nao bo`Encephalon
nao dau`Where is, where are
nao dien do`(y hoc) Electro-encephalogram
nao do`Some
nao dong`Get into a flurry, cause a stir
nao hay`No one knows, no one knew, no one can tell, no one could tell
nao la`nhu nao
nao long`Sad, heart-rending#moved
nao nao`xem nao
nao ne`nhu nao nung
nao ngo`Against all expectations; unexpectedly
nao nhiet`animated
nao nuc`Be in an eager bustle#nhu nao nuc
nao nung`sad; sorrowful#to flinch; to deter
nao oc`to rake one's brain
nao vet`to dredge
nap`lid; cover#to deliver ; to pay (in); to deposit#to hide; to lie in hiding
nap bong`Take cover behind (shield oneself with) someone's power
nap thai`(tu cu) Bring wedding presents to the bridge's house
nap thue`o pay taxes
nat`Bully, cow#crushed
nat ban`Nirvana
nat bet`Utterly divided, very confused
nat gan`Worried, puzzled.#ven stones were worried, let alone men
nat nhau`rumpled
nat no`to browbeat; to thunder
nat nuoc`nhu nat
nat oc`brain-storming
nat ruou`Do wrong when drunk, talk nonsense when drunk
nau`(tu cu) Processional dress.#dia phuong) Band, gang, clique#Cook, boil#Hide, go into hiding#Over[-ripe]#brown#xem dau nau
nau an`to cook ; to do cooking
nau bep`nhu nau an
nau chay`(ky thuat) Melt
nau mat`Take care not to show one's face, conceal one's hand (while masterminding something)
nau nau`xem nau (lay)
nau non`Light brown
nau nuong`Cook, do the cooking
nau song`Monk's brown clothes
nau tieng`Lie low
nay`(dia phuong) Big#Bounce#Just ago#Now; at present; at this time#That [person]; that [thing]#This (high, much...), that (high, much...)#labby fat part of pork sides#labbily fat#dia phuong) nhu nay#here#his#to bounce#to pry; to prize
nay gio`For a short while, for a moment
nay kinh`Respectfully yours, with the assurances of one's highest consideration
nay lua`Very fierce
nay mai`In the near future
nay mam`Sprout, germinate, bud
nay muc`Line [with ink]
nay no`Bud, sprout#This and that; this, that and the other
nay noi`Begin to sprout (a defect not hereditary)
nay ra`o flash
nay sinh`Develop, appear
nay thu`Faithfully your, your obedient servant
ne`(dia phuong) Drive to one side, drive sidewards#(dia phuong) nhu nay#Concern oneself with trifles#Flimsy pretext#thong tuc) Plenty#Smooth (mortar)#loat#cracked; chapped; choppy#to crack; to split#to dodge; to evade; to fend off#to respect;to have sonsideration for
ne co`Stick-in-the-mud, old-fogey
ne ha`to mind
ne loi`Have a [high] regard for (somebody's words, recomendations)
ne long`Spare (somebody's feelings)
ne mat`Have regard for
ne nang`nhu ne nang
ne nep`nhu nen nep
ne tranh`to avoid
ne vi`nhu ne nang Have consideration for
needly`o solder; to weld
nem`bed; mattress#pork hash wrapped in banana leaf#to taste (food); to try#to throw ; to fling; to cast; to chuck#wedge#to season;to flavour (with)
nem dia`The discus throw
nem don`(thong tuc) Taste blows
nem mui`Taste [of]
nem nep`To crouch in fear
nem ta`Putting the weight
nem trai`Experience, taste
nen`Candle, wax#dien) Candle-power lamp#Strike, hit, beat#am down#foundation#ought to#candle#to restrain; to control; to curb; to check#bar; bullion
nen chang`Must or must not, be worth while or not
nen chi`For that reason, therefore, hence
nen gian`o check; to control one's anger
nen long`to repress; suppress one's feelings
nen mong`foundation
nen na`Elegant
nen nep`groove, orderly routine
nen nguoi`Become a good person
nen tang`base; basis ; foundation
nen than`Sound, thorough
nen tho`Poetic, beautiful like a poem
nen troi`The sky (as background) the firmament
neo`Drag#[Rice] threshing bamboo pincers#ord tightening stick#ighten with a tightenting stick#anchor #to anchor #way; direction
neo don`Short of manpower, of small size (noi ve gia dinh)
neo duong`Way
nep`Fold, crease#nghia bong) Way#lutinous rice, sticky rice#ticky and white variety#hem; rim#to crouch
nep cai`Large-size-glutinous rice
nep cam`Violet blutinous rice
nep con`Small-size glutinous rice
nep cu`Routine
nep cuon`(giai phau) Circumvolution
net`Flick with a bent bamboo slat, give a flick with a bent bamboo slat#eat#ntimidate#Habit, behaviour#ood habit, good behaviour#stroke; line (of pen); line
net chu`Handwriting
net mat`Face's expression#eatures
neu`if; unless# shall go out. In the event of#tet pole#to raise; to bring up; to set
neu can`If necessary. if need be
neu guong`Set an example
neu khong`If not; other wise
neu nhu`If
neu the`If so, if that is the case
neu vay`nhu neu the
nga`Russia#Way; direction#to ferment#to bard; to incline; to lean#ivory#to fall; to tumble down
nga gia`Agree on price
nga le`Clear up, be elucidated
nga long`Lose heart
nga lung`to lie down
nga mi`Fine eyebrows, beautiful eyebrows
nga mu`to take off one's hat
nga nga`Tipsy
nga nga say`tipsy
nga nghieng`to waver
nga ngon`Indecent, unseemly#Pell-mell, in great disorder
nga ngu`Settled
nga ngua`Fall on one's back#e taken aback by something which comes as a complete surprise
nga nuoc`to suffer from malaria
nga va`Impose a fine (old practice in commnes)
nga van`Russian
nga voi`elephant's tusk, ivory
ngac`(dia phuong) Lift, raise [one's head]#Get stuck, get held up
ngac nga ngac ngu`xem ngac ngu (lay)
ngac ngoai`Be at death's door, be at the point of death
ngac ngu`(tu cu) Crocodile#Stumble
ngac nhien`o be suprised;#o wonder; to be astonished
ngach`Threshold (of a door)#cale (of taxes...)#back street
ngach bac`nhu ngach trat
ngach trat`Various ranks and grades (in a classification scale of civil servants...)
ngai`Hispid fig#Having an immature smell (taste), having not quite the right smell (taste) (because not quite fully cured...)#Righteousness, faithfulness#Sagebrush#hiltre#Worried; hesitant; fearful#to fear; to be afraid#ombycid moth#how; your excellency#throne
ngai cuu`Mugwort, common sagebrush
ngai dang`(thuc vat) Absinth
ngai ngai`xem ngai (lay)#xem ngai (lay)
ngai ngan`nhu ngan ngai
ngai ngu`(tu cu) His Majestry#not fully awake
ngai ngung`shy of, reluctant to
ngai vang`Throne
ngam`(it dung) To fit, to be just right#(of tea). to draw#Dovetail halving#Threaten, intimidate#awny#secret, underground ; tacit#to contemplate;to look at admire oneself#to hold in one's mouth#to ponder, to reflect upon, to think over#to soak; to steep. to declaim; to recite
ngam cam`(dia phuong) Keep mum
ngam don`Tell on (somebody)
ngam hong`(it dung) Shut one's breath#eep absolutely quiet
ngam khuc`Elegy
ngam mieng`Shut (close) one's mouth#eep silent, hold one's tongue
ngam nga`to croon
ngam ngam`Dull and lasting#xem ngam#xem ngam (lay)#xem ngam (lay)
ngam ngap`Without leaving any traces
ngam nghi`Reflect upon, cogitate
ngam ngoay`cung viet ngam nguay Fret and fume, Scowl and frown
ngam ngoi`nhu ngam vinh
ngam nguay`xem ngam ngoay
ngam ngui`to pity; to have compassion
ngam nguyt`(khau ngu) Give (someone) a black look
ngam nuoc`(hoa hoc) Hydrated
ngam tam`Keep strict silence
ngam tom`(thong tuc) Pigeon-hole
ngam vanh`Ket co ngam vanh, xem ket
ngam vinh`cung nhu ngam ngoi Compose and recite a poem extempore (under the inspiration or some feeling)
ngam vuot`Gaze at oneself in the mirrir for one's meticulous toilet
ngan`Trace left in lines#old (on the wrists, the neck...)#money#to vibrate#mountains and forests#river bank#short; brief#to be depressed; be tired of#to divide; to part; to get apart. to prevent; to hinder; to stem#drawer (of table)
ngan ban vi`Silver standard
ngan cach`Separate
ngan cam`to forbid; to debar
ngan can`Hinder, hamper
ngan chan`Prevent, stop
ngan ha`the Milky Way, the Galaxy
ngan hang`bank
ngan hon`Silver wedding
ngan keo`Drawer
ngan kho`Treasury
ngan khoan`redit
ngan le`Traces of tears
ngan mat`nhu ngan
ngan nap`orderly; well-ordered
ngan nga`Trill (when declaming poems...)
ngan ngai`hesitation
ngan ngam`Be tired of
ngan ngan`xem ngan (lay)#xem ngan (lay)
ngan ngo`amazed; astounded
ngan ngu`proverb; adage#to dilly-dally, to vacillate
ngan nguoi`nhu ngan
ngan noi`How depressing, how disgusting
ngan phieu`money order
ngan quy`fund
ngan sach`budget; the estimates
ngan thu`nhu nghin thu
ngan tien`(tu cu) Silver coin (used as a decoration)
ngan tro`Hamper, hinder
ngan trung`nhu nghin trung
ngan vang`nhu nghin vang
ngan xua`nhu nghin xua
ngang`Slender and elongated#nhu ngung#ordinary#across; through#ross; horisontal#to bar; to stop; to hinder
ngang buong`obstinate, self-willed
ngang chuong`Offensive, shocking
ngang da`Lose one's appetite
ngang diem`e equal in score
ngang doc`(Do something) in one's own sweet time (way); at will; fearless of nobody
ngang gia`At par
ngang hang`equal, of the same rank
ngang ngang`Wayward, unruly#xem ngang (lay)
ngang nghiu`Lanky#caggy, scraggy, scrawny
ngang ngo`Unruly and perverse
ngang ngua`topsyturvy
ngang nguoc`Perverse
ngang nhien`inconsiderate
ngang noi`(dia phuong) nhu gach noi
ngang phe`Utterly absurd
ngang tai`Absurd, unreasonabe
ngang tam`Keep pace with
ngang tang`Unusually proud, extraordinarily proud
ngang tat`Illegal, illicit
ngang trai`worsensial; absurd
nganh`Twig, branch, phylum#barb#xem ngoanh
nganh co`o turn one's head
nganh nghe`Trade, profession, career
nganh ngon`in details; all the ins and outs.
ngao`dull, stupid#oyster#to mix#to scoff; to laugh at
ngao doi`Show contempt of others, be contemptuous
ngao du`Stroll about, wander about for pleasure
ngao man`prond; haughty; arrogant
ngao ngan`Feel depressed. feel immensely melancholy.
ngao ngat`to erhale
ngao nghe`tinh tu. haughty, scornful
ngao nguoc`Impertinent, insolent (in a self-willed way)
ngap`dong tu. to yawn; to gape; to give a yawn#flooded; submerged; inundated
ngap dau`Over head and ears
ngap gio`(dia phuong) Come a cropper (in some undertalking)
ngap mat`Littered up
ngap nga ngap ngung`xem ngap ngung (lay)
ngap nghe`Look wiht covetous eyes, aim, have designs on
ngap ngua`Full of, profusely covred with
ngap ngung`dong tu. to hesitate; towaver; to halt
ngat`Faint, swoon, become onconscious#izzy#ery expensive#Strict, stringent, rigorous#Very [sweet]#to feel oppressed; to breath with difficult#to interrupt
ngat dien`Interrupter
ngat hoi`uffocating, suppressive
ngat mui`Stuffy
ngat nga ngat nguong`xem ngat nguong (lay)#xem ngat nguong (lay)
ngat ngao`thom ngat ngao sweet-scented
ngat ngheo`cung nhu ngat ngheo Split one's sides (with lauhter)#hard; difficult; serious (illness)#nhu ngat ngheo
ngat ngong`Strict, stern
ngat nguong`Tottering#swaying; unsteady
ngat quang`Interrupted
ngat troi`Sky-craping, sky-high, towering
ngat vi`Because of the compelling reason of the complling reason of money shortage
ngau`(thong tuc) Gobble, devour#ipe#o ahigh degree#(thong tuc) cung nhu ngau xi Raise a fuus, kick up a fuus#Aglaia (kind of tree with fragrant little flowers)#eventh lunar month#At a loose end#cung nhu ngau very muddy#loodshot#xem ngau
ngau hop`Fortuitous coincidence, fortuitous concurrence
ngau hung`sudden inspiration
ngau luc`(vat ly) Couple
ngau ngau`Crunch#Crunch[ing noise]#xem ngau (lay)
ngau nghien`Devour
ngau nhi`nhu ngau nhien
ngau nhien`by accident; by chance; accidental
ngau xi`(thong tuc) nhu ngau
ngay`(dia phuong) Annoy, trouble, worry#Day#Salmonberry (cay)#ave one's appetite cloyed#e fed up with, be tried of#Tastily rich, tasting deliciously buttery#[Be] Stupefiel#direct; straight#s soon as#to snore
ngay Tet`Tet holiday, Tet festival, Tet, Tet season
ngay ca`even, not excepting
ngay cang`More with every passing day
ngay cong`working day ; workday
ngay dai`naive
ngay dem`Day and night
ngay do`stiff, stark
ngay duong`A day's walk
ngay gio`Anniversary of a death#time
ngay hoi`Festive day, festival, festivities
ngay khi`s soon as
ngay kia`The day after the day after tomorrow#The day after tomorrow
ngay lap tuc`Ngay tuc thi#t one, pat, right away, most immediately
ngay le`holiday; feast-day
ngay lung`Be a lazy-bones
ngay mai`tomorrow
ngay mat`Be stunned into silence#nhu ngay nguoi
ngay mua`harvest time
ngay nga`Importune; nag at
ngay ngan`Neat, tidy
ngay ngat`to go into ecstasy
ngay ngay`Be on tenterhooks, be on the tenters#every day, day afterday#xem ngay (lay)
ngay ngo`Dull, stupid
ngay nguoi`Look bewildred
ngay rau`(thong tuc) nhu ngay mat
ngay ray`Today year
ngay sau`In a distant future
ngay sinh`birthday
ngay soc`(tu cu) The first day of the lunar month
ngay thang`date; time#straghtforward, honest
ngay that`Sincere; honest; candid
ngay tho`naive; innocent; guiltless
ngay thuong`Week-day
ngay truoc`In the old days, in former times
ngay tuc khac`nhu ngay lap tuc
ngay tuc thi`nhu ngay lap tuc
ngay via`(ton giao) Birth anniversary (of Budha)
ngay vong`(tu cu) Full moon day
ngay xanh`Tender days, youth
ngay xua`formely; once upon a time
ngay xuong`nhu ngay lung
nghe`(Bot) saffron; croeus#trade; profession#(tu cu) Doctor of letters#ue court ministry clerk#(tu cu) Lion's club, smaal lion (as a decoration on top of pillars or incense-burners)#Buffalo ['s] calf#ook at from the corners of one's eyes; glance at (through over)#Knotweed, jointweed, lady's-thumb#to hear#work; craft; occupation; profession; business
nghe benh`Auscultate
nghe chung`cung nhu nghe nhu It seems
nghe doi`Nghe doi no the#uch is life
nghe hoi`Nghe hoi noi cho (thong tuc)#o learn by mere hearsay
nghe len`o listen secretly
nghe loi`Listen to, comply with the advice of, take the advice of
nghe lom`(dia phuong) nhu nghe lom#Overhear
nghe mat`Peep, glance
nghe nghiep`Trade, profession, carrer, occupation#nhu nghe nghiep
nghe ngo`nhu nghe nghe
nghe ngong`(nghia xau) nhu nghe#Prick up one's ears, follow eagerly, follow expectantly
nghe nhan`artiste, craftsman
nghe nhin`Audiovisual
nghe nhu`nhu nghe chung
nghe noi`It is said that
nghe phu`By-trade
nghe ra`Understand; listen to reason
nghe si`artist
nghe tay`Saffron
nghe theo`Listen and obey, obey, take (somebody's) advice
nghe thuat`art
nghe van`Civilian career
nghe vo`Military career; martial arts
nghech`Look bewildered, look puzzled#ook up#Looking stupid, looking dull
nghech mat`Look up
nghech ngac`Puzzled, bewildered.(by something new)#nhu nghech
nghen`(dia phuong, khau ngu) nhu nhe#Block#choked; strangled#to crane
nghen co`Crane one's neck
nghen loi`Be struck dumb (with emotion)
nghen ngao`to be choked by tears
nghenh`(it dung) nhu nghen#Look round, look about one
nghenh chien`offer battle
nghenh dich`Wait for and engage the enemy
nghenh don`Welcome
nghenh gia`(tu cu) welcome the king
nghenh hon`(tu cu) Go to the bride's house and escort her to the bridegroom's
nghenh ngang`Hard of hearing#Swaggering#ying about in the way, blocking the way
nghenh tan`to welcome (a guest)
nghenh tiep`Welcome and entertain
nghenh tong`Welcome and see off, meet and see off
nghenh xuan`Welcome spring in
ngheo`(thong tuc) Pop off, kick the bucket#Jade#nhu ngeo#poor; needy; indigent; proventy
ngheo doi`Reduced to destitution, starving because of poverty
ngheo hen`poor and low
ngheo kho`In very reduced circumstances#nhu ngheo tung
ngheo nan`destitute. poverty-stricken, miserable
ngheo ngat`In strained circumstances, harn up
ngheo tung`needy
nghet`Too tight, strangling#hoked up, clogged up#Very [bitter]
nghet mui`to sniffle; to snuffle
nghet tho`Nearly strangled, suffocated#ppressive
ngheu`(dia phuong) nhu ngao Sing, recite disconnected phrases (for one's own entertainment)#Very tall and thin, very lanky
ngheu nghen`Sitting unstably (in a high place)
nghi`(it dung) Loyalty, constancy#to doubt; to suspect#to rest; to repose; to take a rest#to think
nghi an`(luat phap) Deliberation#Doubtful legal case
nghi binh`Troops manssed for deceiving the enemy#iversionary stratagem, diversionary tactics
nghi bung`Think to oneself
nghi chan`Call a halt, stop for a short while (during a trip)
nghi de`Take one's maternity live
nghi dinh`decree
nghi dinh thu`Protocol
nghi gat`(tu cu) Yes-man, yes-deputy (selected by the colonialists to sit in their so-called parliament)
nghi he`Summer holiday
nghi hoa`to hold peace talks
nghi hoac`Doubt, be in doubt#Nghi nghi hoac hoac (lay)
nghi huu`Retire [on a person]
nghi ky`Have suspicion
nghi lai`Think better of (something), have second thoughts
nghi le`Be on holiday, be on one's holidays#Rites, rituals, ceremony
nghi luan`to deliberate, to debate
nghi luc`energy, will
nghi mat`Go on holiday
nghi mon`Alter-curtain
nghi nam`Take one's annual leave
nghi ngai`Be reluctant (to do something) because still in doubt
nghi ngo`Suspect, doubt
nghi ngoay`Move one's fingers nimbly
nghi ngoi`Ponder over, consider carefully, worry about#Rest, take a rest
nghi om`Take one's sick leave
nghi phep`Be on leave, be on furlough
nghi quyet`resolution
nghi ra`Think out
nghi si`senator ; deputy ; MP (member of parliament)
nghi su`Item of business, business (at a conference)
nghi tay`Knock off
nghi thuc`form; formality; ceremony
nghi tiet`Riter, ceremonials
nghi toi`(luat phap) Deliberate upon [and fix] the punishment
nghi trua`Take a siesta
nghi truong`(tu cu) Speaker (of a colonialist House of deputies)#nhu nghi vien
nghi van`a doubtful question
nghi ve`With pomp and ceremony
nghi viec`to leave off work
nghi vien`cung nhu nghi truong Parliament, House of deputies, Chamber of deputies, House of representatives#nhu nghi si
nghia`dense; meaning; impont
nghia binh`nhu nghia quan
nghia boc`(tu cu) Loyal servant
nghia cu`Good deep, magnanimous deep
nghia de`Younger brother byadoption, foster-brother
nghia dia`cemetory; burial ground; grave yard
nghia dung`Loyal and brave
nghia hiep`Chivalrous, knightly
nghia khi`Will to do good, disposition to do good (to the masses...)
nghia vu`duty; obligation
nghich`contrary; opposite; reverse
nghich canh`adversity; adverse; circumstances
nghich ly`Paradox
nghich mat`Unseemly
nghich ngom`Playful, mischievous
nghich nhi`cung nhu nghich tai Unpleasant to the ears, Unacceptable
nghich phong`Adverse wind
nghich tai`nhu nghich nhi
nghich than`(tu cu) Rebellious subject
nghich thuyet`Heresy
nghiem`Consider#e efficacious#toan hoc) Root (of an equation)#strict; grave; stern
nghiem cach`Strict
nghiem cam`to forbid
nghiem can`Solemnly respectful
nghiem chinh`(it dung) Strict upright, strict honest#Serious, Strict
nghiem duong`(tu cu) Father
nghiem huan`(tu cu) Father's admonishment, fahter's recommendation
nghiem khac`severe; stern; hard
nghiem lenh`Strict order
nghiem mat`Secret and strict, onconspicuous and strict
nghiem minh`Strict and clear
nghiem ngat`cung nhu nghiem nhat Very strict, very stringent
nghiem nghi`Having a firm sense of decorum, grave
nghiem nhat`(dia phuong) nhu nghiem ngat
nghiem nhien`Unruffed, Imperturbable
nghiem phu`(tu cu) Father
nghiem so`(toan hoc) nhu nghiem
nghiem thu`Check and take over
nghiem trang`Grave, decent and dignified
nghiem trong`serious; grave
nghiem tu`(tu cu) Father and mother
nghiem tuc`Serious and strict
nghien`Be addicted to#to crush; to pound; to grind#to grind; to grit; to gnash
nghien but`(tu cu) nhu but nghien
nghien cuu`to study; to examine
nghien cuu sinh`Post-granduate
nghien ngam`Ponder, brood over
nghien ngap`Be an opium adict
nghien ngau`nhu ngau nghien
nghien rang`Grind one's teeth, clench one's teeth
nghieng`Lean, incline, tilt
nghieng nga`Veer, osscillate
nghieng ngua`Fluctuating, vacillating, undecided#ull of hardships
nghiep`Trade, profession#arma
nghiep bao`Retribution by karma; karma
nghiep chuong`Karma
nghim`Thousand#xem chim nghim
nghin nghit`xem nghit (lay)
nghin thu`For ever
nghinh`o look sideways#o receive; to greet; to meet
nghinh chien`dong tu. to intercept (one's enemy)
nghinh ngang`anghty; arrogant
nghit`Dense, deep
ngo`(dia phuong) Coriander#(thong tuc) Doltish, dull-headed#Be not quite certain, be still doubtful#Ignore, overlook, let pass, connive#Open#Queer, quaint#thong tuc) cute (my)#dia phuong) Rabid#n case#Rash, reckless#Stupefied#The seventh Earthly Branch (symbolized by the horse)#oon, midday#gate#maize; Indian corn; (V.S) corn#to see; to look at#to suspect; to doubt#to think; to believe
ngo bien`Meet with misfortune
ngo cam`Catch [a] cold
ngo cong`(it dung) nhu ret
ngo cut`Blind alley, cul-de-sac
ngo dao`Gnostic
ngo dau`Do not think, do not expect
ngo doc`poisoning
ngo hau`In order to
ngo hem`alley
ngo khoai`Maize and sweet potato
ngo loi`Speak out, express
ngo long`Open one's heart
ngo nan`Be in danger
ngo ngac`dazed; bewilldered#nhu ngo ngac (nghia manh hon)
ngo ngach`Nook and cranny#nghia bong) Minute detail, smallest detail
ngo ngan`Stunned, as if out of one's sense#nhu ngan ngo
ngo ngang`At fault#Look at, attend to, see to
ngo ngao`Be bewildered, be dazed#nhu ngo
ngo nghe`Silly, foolish
ngo nghich`Wayward and insolent
ngo ngo`xem ngo (lay)#xem ngo (lay)
ngo ngoay`Scrape round (in something hollow)#Wriggle, spuirm
ngo nguoc`Wayward and impertinent
ngo nhan`to mistake
ngo nho`In case
ngo sat`Unintentional homicide
ngo vuc`Suspect, doubt
ngo y`Make known one's intention, express one's intention
ngoa`Sharp-tongue#ntruthful#xem tho ngoa
ngoac`(khau ngu) Open wide (one's mouth)#Hang (on a hook), hook#Hook#ut a caret, insert (omitted words...) where a caret is marked#thong tuc) Be in cahoots with (My)
ngoac kep`Quotation marks, quotes, inverted commans
ngoac ngoac`Be in cahoots with
ngoac tay`Link forefingers (in sign of a contract agreed upon)
ngoac vuong`Square brackets
ngoach`Dai ngoach#oo tough
ngoai`out; outside; without; exterior; external#xem nam ngoai
ngoai co`xem ngoai
ngoai cuoc`Be an outsider
ngoai da`Developing on the skin#or external use
ngoai duong`n the street
ngoai giao`piplomacy
ngoai giao doan`Diplomatic corps
ngoai khoi`Off-shore, off in the high seas
ngoai le`Marginal
ngoai mat`On the outside, in the external appearnce
ngoai mieng`Pay lip service to
ngoai ngu`foreign language
ngoai o`suburbs; outskirts
ngoai quoc`foreign country; foreign parts
ngoai ra`besides; beyond; thereto
ngoai tai`Bo ngoai tai#o turn a deaf ear to, to ignore
ngoai thuong`foreign trade
ngoai troi`In the open [air]
ngoam`Mortise#to bite; to snap
ngoan`good; well-behaved
ngoan co`stubborn; obstinate; contumacious
ngoan cuong`With stamina and sense of purpose, dogged
ngoan dao`Pious, devout
ngoan muc`pleasant to the eyes
ngoan ngeo`o wind about; to meander
ngoan ngoan`docile; obedient
ngoan ngoeo`Meandering, full of twists and turns, zigzagging
ngoang`Disproportionately [long]#nhu ngoang
ngoang ngoang`(it dung) Quite empty, considerably empty
ngoanh`Turn one's head, turn round
ngoanh di`Turn in another direction, turn away#eglect
ngoanh lai`Turn one's head, turn round#ive care again to after neglecting (someone)
ngoanh mat`Turn away
ngoao`Mew, miaou, miaow
ngoat`Turn in another direction, turn#ag, waggle, wave#nhu ngoat
ngoat ngoeo`Limp#eakly#Tortuous, devious
ngoay`Scrape round in some hollow thing, winkle#rite very quickly, scrawl#Turn away in anger#goay ngoay (lay, y tang)#dia phuong) Wag, waggle
ngoay ngoay`xem ngoay (lay)
ngoc`Small branch (of a road)#ift up#danh tu. gem; precious stone#stupid; idiot
ngoc bich`Emerald
ngoc boi`Gem ornament.#nghia bong) (tu cu) Pearl (from the moral point of view), paragon of virtue
ngoc chi`(tu cu) Royal ordinance
ngoc chieu`nhu ngoc chi
ngoc dau`List one's head, raise one's head#et better off
ngoc dien`Beautiful face, lovely face
ngoc duong`(tu cu) Wealth family
ngoc hanh`Penis
ngoc hoang`God, king of heaven, heaven
ngoc lan`(Bot) magnolia
ngoc lan tay`Ilang-ilang
ngoc nga`Jade-like, ivory-like, jewel-like
ngoc nga ngoc nghech`xem ngoc nghech (lay)
ngoc ngach`Narrow and out-of-the-way road
ngoc nghech`Like a big dull-head, lubberly#nhu ngoc 
ngoc nu`(tu cu) Beautiful girl; fairy
ngoc the`(tu cu) your precious person
ngoc tho`(tu cu, van chuong) The moon
ngoc thuc`(tu cu) rice
ngoc trai`pearl
ngoe`Crab'slegs#ew-born baby's cry#Marsh frog
ngoe ngoay`Waggle, wag
ngoe ngoe`Croak#xem ngoe
ngoi`(dia phuong) Expect#Creep strenuously up#trive toward, struggle for a long time toward the finish#Knock off#canal; arroyo#primer; fuse; match#throne#(gram) person#tile#to sit#xem sang ngoi
ngoi am duong`Double tile
ngoi bau`The throne
ngoi bo`Ridge-tile
ngoi but`Nib
ngoi chieu`Flat-tile
ngoi dung`Idle away one's time. become a lazybones from idling away one's time too long
ngoi i`o sit tight
ngoi khen`nhu khen ngoi
ngoi khong`Idle away one's time
ngoi le`Hang aboutgossiping
ngoi moc`Hook-tile
ngoi no`Detonator
ngoi noc`Rigde-tile
ngoi ong`Tube-tile
ngoi roi`Idle away one's time, twiddle one's thumbs
ngoi sao`Star#ilm star
ngoi tay`Grant a respite
ngoi thu`Order of precedence, rank
ngoi troi`nhu ngoi bau
ngoi tu`to go to prison; to jail
ngoi viet`nib
ngoi vua`The throne
ngom`(thong tuc) nhu ngoeo#Completely, entirely#Pitch [dark], deep [black]#ery [bitter]
ngom day`Sit up quickly
ngom ngoam`Piggish (noi ve cach an)
ngom ngop`xem ngop (lay)
ngon`(thong tuc) Gobble, cram, bolt#Dark [red]#Finger, teo#pecial skill, speciality, trick#In plenty, plentiful#delicious; tasty; succulent#top; peak; summit
ngon an`nhu ngon xoi
ngon chan`toe
ngon giac`Have had a good sleep
ngon hanh`(tu cu) Wards and actions; talk and deeds
ngon lanh`Dalicious, tasty, appetizing
ngon luan`Speech
ngon mat`Pleasant-looking, inviting. attractive, tempting
ngon mieng`With great appetite, with good appetite
ngon ngang`Lying about in disorder and in the way
ngon nganh`in details
ngon ngau`Bolt, gobble up; devour
ngon ngon`Dense with
ngon ngot`Honeyed, sweet#xem ngot (lay)#xem ngot (lay)
ngon ngu`Language#The Vietnamese language belongs to a language group which was established quite a long time ago in East Asia. However, changes in material conditions over many centuries and the increasing demands of cultural life increased the development of the Vietnamese language, both spoken and written. While adopting many elements of the Chinese language, the Vietnamese people creatively Vietnamized many Chinese words, and they gradually became Han-Viet (Chinese-Vietnamese), incorporated alongside purely Vietnamese words. The Vietnamization was not only applied to the Chinese language however, but also to the French and other languages to create a great, diversified, vital vocabulary for the Vietnamese language
ngon ngu hoc`inguistics
ngon nguon`Origin, foundation
ngon o`(thong tuc) Very easy
ngon tu`words; language
ngon xoi`(thong tuc) Easy (job)
ngong`Crane#e in erection#Lanky, ungracefully lanky#Lisp.#khau ngu) Be stupid, be dull#Rash; eccentric, peculiar#Tall shoot (of cabbage, tobacco plant...)#owering#Tenon-like axis, tenon-like hinge#Wait for, expect#groose
ngong cho`nhu ngong trong
ngong cuong`eccentric
ngong nghenh`Swagger#ngracefully (unproportionally) lanky
ngong nghiu`Lisp
ngong ngoeo`Winding, twisty
ngong ngong`xem ngong (lay)#xem ngong (lay)
ngong trong`Expect, look forward to
ngop`Be frightened,dread#Feel dizzy (at altitudes)
ngot`Abate, subside, cease#Diminish, Decrease; become more compact#early, a litter less than#Feel suffocated#Grow oppressively hot#ovet#sweet
ngot bui`sweet
ngot giong`Leaving a sweetish taste, leaving a delicious taste (noi ve do
ngot lim`Very sweet#ery tasty, very delicious
ngot lu`Very tasty, quite delicious#nhu ngot lu
ngot ngao`Sweet, suave.#o smile and speak suavely
ngot ngat`Oppressive, stuffy, stifling
ngot nguoi`Stifling, sweltering
ngot nhat`Sugary, smooth (of voice)
ngot sac`Cloyingly sweet
ngu`Be seated in a stately way#oyal#Measure, limit, moderation#espicable fellow#Tassel#five#stupid; foolish; doltish#to live; to dwell#to sleep; to be asleep
ngu am`Phonic#The five notes (of the traditional musical scale)
ngu am hoc`Phonetics
ngu boi tu`(thuc vat, duoc) Gall-nut
ngu canh`Context
ngu coc`Cereals, grain food-stuffs
ngu cu`Fishing-tackle#Reside (in a strange place)
ngu dai`Five generations#Silly, foolish
ngu dan`Fisherman#stupid people
ngu day`Get up
ngu dieu`Intonation
ngu doan`(ngon ngu) Syntagm#Short-limbed
ngu dot`Foolish and ignorant, siily and ignorant
ngu ga`Doze, drowse
ngu gat`Nod
ngu giac dai`The Pentagon
ngu gioi`The five nays (of Buddhism) (no killing of animals, no stealing, no sex, no vulgar speech, no alcohol drinking)
ngu guc`(dia phuong) nhu ngu gat
ngu hanh`The five basic elements (metal, wood, water, fire, earth, according to Eastern plilosopky)
ngu he`family (of languages)
ngu hinh`(tu cu) The five punishments (death, banishment for life) deportation, imprisonment, fine)
ngu hoc`(it dung) nhu ngon ngu hoc
ngu huynh`(tu cu) Your modest elder
ngu khi`Sleep like a log, sleep soundly, be fast asleep, be dead to the world#Tone, intonation
ngu lang`Put up indiscriminately at others' houses
ngu loi`Torpedo
ngu long`(dia ly) Ichthyosaurus
ngu me`Dream#leep soundly, sleep like a log (tops)
ngu muoi`Completely dim-headed
ngu ngo`Like a dullard, doltish#Naively silly
ngu ngoc`Dull, dull-headed
ngu ngon`Five-word verse#fable
ngu ngon hoc`nhu ngon ngu hoc 
ngu ong`Fisher, fisherman.#esting on his oars, the fisher returned to his distant place
ngu phap`syntax grammar
ngu phu`(tu cu) Ngu phu ngu phu#The common people, she rabble#fisherman
ngu qua`The five fruits (banana, oranges, kumquats, pomelos, finger citrons)
ngu quan`the five senses.
ngu sac`The five primary colours (blue, ye;;ow, red, white, black)
ngu si`Thick-headed
ngu su`Royal adviser (in charge of preventing the rule from doing wrong)
ngu tang`The five inner parts innards
ngu thuong`The five constant virtues (in feudal ethics) (benevolence, righteousness, proprieties, wisdom and fidelity)
ngu tieu`(cu)fisherman and firewoodman
ngu truong`fishery, fishing-ground
ngu tuan`Fifty years (of age)
ngu van`Philology
ngu vi`the five tastes
ngu xuan`Utterly stupid
ngu y`(tu cu) My humble opinion, my humble idea#Imply#royal physician
ngua`Prevent#horse#to itch#with face upward, on one's back#urn upward
ngua cai`are
ngua mat`Shock the eyes; feel uneasy at seeing something shocking the eyes
ngua mieng`nh ngua mom
ngua mom`(thong tuc) cung noi ngua mieng +Feel like speaking (even out of turn), cannot help speaking, be itching to speak
ngua ngay`nhu ngua#idget, be spoiling for
ngua nghe`(thong tuc) feel sexual urge, feel aroused
ngua ngheo`(xau) Jade, hack
ngua nguoi`(mia) Rickshaw-driver (thoi thuoc Phap)
ngua o`lack horse
ngua tai`Shock the ears; feel uncomfortable at hearing something shocking the ears
ngua tay`Beg#Feel the urge of doing something someone is bungling#e itching to strike (someone)
ngua tiet`khau ngu) Have one's blood up, be fiare by one's anger to action, flare up
ngua troi`Mantis
ngua van`Zebra
nguc`chest; breast; borom#prison; jail; gaol
nguc hinh`Imprisonment
nguc lai`(tu cu) Gaoler, jailer, gaol
nguc that`Prison, jailer, jailor
nguc toi`Dark jail, sinister gaol
nguc tot`(tu cu) Guard, warder
nguc tu`Prison
ngui`Sniff, smell
ngum`(dia phuong) nhu ngom#Mouthful, gulp, draught
ngung`Condense#ease, stop, knock off, interrupt, break, suspend#Raise, turn up, lift#to stop; to draw up
ngung ban`Cease fire
ngung buoc`Stop advancing, stop [going], come to a stop
ngung but`finish writing (a letter)
ngung dong`Be at a standstill
ngung tay`Knock off
ngung tre`Come to a standstill, stagnate#Come to standstill, stagnate
ngung tu`(vat ly) Condense
nguoc`Raise [one's eyes]#Upside down#gainst (the wind, the tide), windward#ontrary, opposite
nguoc dai`to maltreat; to ill-treat
nguoc doi`Nonsensical, absurd
nguoc dong`Upstream
nguoc lai`Contrary to#n the contrary#o the contrary
nguoc mat`Unsightly
nguoc ngao`Insolent
nguoi`(cu) Thou, thee#bien am cua nguoi) Man#Subside, become appeased, becomeless sharp (severe), cool down, calm down#cool; cold#man; person; people; individual
nguoi benh`Patient
nguoi chung`Witness
nguoi dep`beautiful woman; handsome
nguoi dien`(thong tuc) Be cold in death pop off#(nhu) nguoi#madman
nguoi doi`the people at large, the world at large#ullard, dolt
nguoi dung`Strange
nguoi hau`Servant, valel
nguoi hung`He-man
nguoi la`Strange, strange person
nguoi lam`Emplyee; servant
nguoi lanh`Very cold
nguoi lon`Adult, grown-up
nguoi ngat`Freezing terribly cold (of food)
nguoi nguoi`All and sundry, everyone, one and all#xem nguoi (lay)#xem nguoi (lay)
nguoi o`(cu) Servant
nguoi ta`people; they; one; you
nguoi tanh`nhu nguoi ngat
nguoi thien co`(van chuong) the dead
nguoi tinh`Lover
nguoi vuon`Pithecanthrope
nguoi xua`The ancients
nguoi yeu`lover; sweet-heart
nguon`source; spring
nguon con`Ins and outs, head and tail
nguon goc`source; origin
nguong`Threshold#ashamed
nguong cua`threshold, doorstep
nguong mat`Ashamed
nguong mo`to look up; to admire
nguong mom`Feel too awkward (embarrassed) to speak, be silenced by a feeling of awkwardness
nguong ngap`Feel awkward
nguong nghiu`awkward
nguong ngung`slightly ashamed
nguong nguong`xem nguong (lay)
nguong vong`Expect favours from above, expect fulfilment of one's wishes by higher level
ngup`Dive, plunge (into the water)
nguu`nguu nhu cow's milk
nguu dau`Cow-pox
nguy`Quisling, puppet., Mighty mischievous
nguy binh`cung noi nguy quan Quisling troops, puppet troops
nguy hiem`angerous; risky; perilous; awkward
nguy nga`splendid; magnificent
nguy tao`Counterfeit, made up
nguy trang`to camovylage
nguy trieu`(su hoc) Dynasty of usurpers
nguy van`Carry out agitation and propaganda among quislings
nguyen canh`Present state of exploitation; present exploiter (of land)
nguyen chat`pure; fine
nguyen dang`Original form
nguyen hinh`True colours, true [evil] nature, cloven hoof
nguyen nhan`cause; reason
nguyen nhan hoc`Etiology
nguyen nien`First year of rule's reign
nguyen quan`Native country, birth-place
nguyen sinh`Proteozoic
nguyen sinh chat`(sinh hoc) Protoplasma
nguyen sinh dong vat`Protozoa
nguyen soai`Field marshal, marshal#(cung noi) nguyen suy
nguyen tac`priciple; fundamental
nguyen thuy`Primitive
nguyen tu`atom
nguyen tu atom`Nang luong nguyen tu atomic energy
nguyen vat lieu`Raw and working material
nguyen vong`aspiration
nguyet bach`Mau nguyet bach#ale white
nguyet cam`oonshaped guitar
nguyet liem`Monthly fees (paid to an association...)#cung noi nguyet phi
nguyet thuc`Lunar eclipse
nha`Chew carefully#thong tuc) Eat#naw#Courteous#legant#Spit out#ischarges, cough out#ome unstuck, do not stick any longer#oo familiar#house; home; abode; domicile#service; bureau
nha an`dining-room, refectory
nha bac hoc`cientist
nha bang`(cu) bank
nha bao`journalist; newsman; newpaperman
nha bao sanh`(dia phuong) maternity hospital
nha bat`canvas tent
nha be`houseboat, floating-house
nha bep`kitchen
nha binh`(cu) military
nha buon`Businessman, trader
nha cai`Banker (at a gaiming table)#erson keeping the shares of a ton tine
nha cau`Roofed corridor (between two buildings), gallery
nha choc troi`Skyscraper
nha chong`One's husband's family
nha chua`The Buddhist clergy, buddhist monk#brothel
nha chuc trach`The authorities
nha chung`Catholic clergy
nha cua`House, dwelling
nha da`Prison, gaol, jail
nha dam`Family busy with a bursial, bereaved family
nha day thep`(cu) Post office 
nha den`(cu) Urban power-station, urban power-house
nha dich`(cu) Yamen's attendant
nha doan`(cu) Customs-office
nha dong`Religious order
nha duoi`Servants' quarters
nha duong cuc`the authorities
nha ga`Gambling house owner#railway-station
nha gac`cung noi nha lau. Many-storied house
nha gai`Bride's family#ride's [family] guest
nha giai`xem nha trai 
nha giam`(cu) Examine with benevolence#Detention prison, detention place
nha giao`Teacher, school-master
nha giau`Weathly (rich) family#he rich
nha hang`restaurant; hotel
nha hat`Theatre, playhouse
nha ho sinh`Maternity hospital
nha in`printing-house
nha khach`guest house
nha kho`(dia phuong) nhu nha dam#Warehoouse, storehouse
nha khoa`dentistry
nha kinh`Glasshouse, greenhouse
nha lai`(cu) Yamen's clerks, yamen's clerkdom
nha lanh dao`eader
nha lao`nhu nha tu
nha lau`nhu nha gac
nha li luan`Theorician
nha luu dong`Trailer
nha may`factory, plant (My)
nha may dien`Power-station
nha mo`Sepulchre, miniature house built on a fresh grave
nha mo pham`(cu) Teacher
nha mon`(cu) Yamen
nha ngang`Annex, wing
nha nghe`player; professional
nha ngheo`Poor family#he poor
nha ngoai`Outbuilding
nha ngu`Dormitory
nha nguoi`(cu) Thou, thee
nha nhac`(cu) Cremmonial music and songs
nha nhan`courteous; courtly; polite; elegant
nha nhem`at dusk
nha nho`Confician scholar
nha nhot`Too familiar
nha noi`Blue blood#rack
nha nong`farmer, agriculturist
nha nuoc`State
nha o`Dwelling
nha o chuot`Slum
nha pha`nhu nha tu
nha phien`opium
nha que`(cu) Native village, native place#ountry#ountry people
nha rap`Canvas tent (set up temporarily for a ceremony)
nha rieng`private house
nha rong`Communal house (in the Western Plateaux)
nha san`House on stilts
nha say`Dryer, drying house
nha si`dentist; dental-surgeon
nha su`Bonze
nha tam`bathroom
nha tang`bereave family#catafalque
nha tay`(cu) Europea-styled house
nha tho`(cu) Brothel, bawdy-house#church, cathedral#poet
nha thuong`hospital
nha tieu`Latrine#cung noi nha_xi
nha tinh nghia`House of affestion (built by the population, for var-invalids or martyrs' families)
nha to`(cu) nhu co dau
nha toi`my old man, my old woman, my huaband, my wife
nha tong`Blue blood; good family
nha trai`bridegroom's family#ridegroom's [family] guest
nha tre`Creche, baby-farming house
nha tren`Main building
nha tro`(cu) nhu co dau#boarding-house; lodging-house
nha troi`Nguoi nha troi#an sent from Heaven, celestial man
nha truong`School#chool board of managers (directors)
nha tu`Monastery#Private house#cung nhu nha lao, nha pha Prison,jail, gaol
nha tu kin`Convent
nha tu tuong`Thinker
nha van`writer
nha van hoa`House (place) of culture
nha ve sinh`Toilet
nha vo`One's wife's family
nha vua`King
nha xac`Mortuary
nha xe`Garage
nha xi`nhu nha tieu 
nha xuat ban`publishing house
nhac`Music#See all of a sudden#azy,slothful#nhu nhac#to talk of the devil#to lift; to raise; to displace#to recall; to remind
nhac cong`Professional executant
nhac cu`Musical instrument#VIETNAMESE TRADITIONAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS: Vietnamese traditional instruments have a rich capacity for expression and are unique. This is shown in many ways. In general, Vietnamese traditional instruments are of simple structure. Sometimes too simple to be called instruments. For example, the leaf-horn has only two requirements: The surface of the leaf should be smooth and the leaf itself not thick. A girl holds the "horn" by the edge in her mouth and begins to produce a shrill sound. After a "performance," the instrument can be thrown away. The jew's harp is only a piece of kouniak or ear of rice. Pitot, another flute, has only two holes - one for blowing and the other for fingering - but it can produce music written from the five-note scale. Castanets are simply two bamboo pieces; a bamboo end can become a split drum; a set of kouniak sticks of various lengths serves as a t'rung. Materials for making these instruments are available at home. The worm's silk will make strings and bamboo, kouniak and gourd covering is available in the garden. Further afield can be found bamboo, kouniak, wood, clay, leather, stone.. Only the parts of instruments are difficult to make. For example, with an organ the trick is to stick a reed into one end for blowing. But simple or not, these instruments are so skilfully made as to be works of art. Their sizes are also unique. Clappers can be as small as a longan kernel; the jew's harp is exactly like an ear of rice; a certain drum is no bigger than a lemon. Other instruments are huge. The lithophone, or Ndut Lieng Krak, is 01.7cm long and the Khanh Son 103cm while lithophones found in other parts of the world are only 80cm long. The Qui Dien bell, cast in 1080 in the times of Nha Hau Ly and Nha Tran, needed a 26 meter-high bell tower to house it. Another bell of the same period was cast in about 4,200 tonnes of bronze. The Van Ban bell with 180 tons in weight, made under Nha Tran, is 127cm high and has a diameter 74 cm. The bronze drum, especially the Son Dong drum, is huge, imposing and beautiful. The Thunder drum, which sounds like thunder, has a 148 cm diameter and is 170 cm high Some drums have a circumference of two metres and are made from the trunk of a banyan tree. Gongs and cymbals range from saucer-size to a plate 90cm in diameter. The different sizes mean that Vietnamese traditional instruments all carry characteristics stemming from the artistic creativity of the people.=The dan nguyet, moon-shaped lute, and dan day, lute, both have high+frets and strings which are never too tight - and not without reason. The strings must be made from worm's thread and the strings and frets are made longer and higher so that the musician can use luring and stressing techniques. The traverse flute, the end-blown flute, the Vietnamese trumpet, the pi-let, the xa-ra-nai- traditional instruments of various ethnic groups-all have plain finger holes without finger devices so that the musician is free to use luring and stressing techniques. The Sing Tien-a type of clapper- is a very simple instrument, but a really creative combination of three well-known instruments: The guiro, the maracas and castanets. All these instruments have made their contributions to traditional Vietnamese music. But the instruments designed so long ago suffer some limitations. One of these is low volume. With the exception of idiophones, membranophones and some wind instruments, almost all traditional instruments make a low sound with short vibrations#Nevertheless, their capacity is both abundant and unique. On the dan nguyet, the musician is able to "stress" a note making it a triple-interval higher note or vice versa. The dan day, a type of lute, also has available a "loose stress" and on the dan bau, monocord, a half-note, a third of a note, a quarter of a note and perhaps even less than a quarter of a note can be created. An even more subtle characteristic of the monocord is that the fingered string, touched, can produce a note lower than that made by the unfingered string. This cannot be done on any other instruments. The one-stringed monocord has a three-octave range, although some improved monocords have a four-octave range. The klongput makes sound without being touched by the musician Another technique worthy of study is that which allows musicians to play such horns as pile and xaranai to make a continuous sound without pausing or stopping. Vietnamese traditional instruments are close to the lives of the people and their activities. Vietnamese instruments - particularly primitive instruments - are part of their activities.=The Thai make the tang bu from bamboo poles and water bags; from pestal and mortar the Muong make the Duong; from sticks to make holes in the ground for sowing, the Khomu make the Kle Kla; others are the ding pa, klong put of the highlanders; the stones hung over a waterfall to make a sound when struck together and used to drive off beasts gave these groups the inspiration to make the very ancient lithophone; an elevated wicker string above a plank-covered hole is called rong Quan and was the prototype for the fantastic monocord; the Phong Tieu, a type of flute, which reminds the listener of a kite flute and the To diep, Ky pa are not remote from the highland hunters' beast-calling horn; the never-ending sound of the wind in caves and caverns, or on hills where kouniaks have been felled, served as tangible models for highlanders voong to be hung before the Nha Rong, or village hall, so that the wind makes a concert throughout the year. The lithophone is both musical instrument and a holy object. The gong and the cymbal are both musical instruments and precious and religious objects. Vietnam's musical instruments spring from real life and were made by creative laborers. The instruments were, and are, crucial to cultural life
nhac gia`(cu, trang trong) in-laws, one's wife'c parents
nhac hat`cung noi thanh nhac Vocal music
nhac khuc`Pice of music, air
nhac kich`Opera
nhac lai`to recall, to evoke, to repeat
nhac mau`(cu, trang trong) Mother-in-law, one's wife's mother
nhac nhe`Light misic
nhac nho`to remind, to call to attention
nhac nhom`Recall often, remind repeatedly, speak of frequently
nhac nhu`Remind and admonish
nhac vo`(san khau) Prompt (an actor)
nhach`Leathery
nhai`(Bot) jasmine; jessamine#maid#(dia phuong) Ape, mimic, imiate (someone's voice)#cung noi nhai con, nhai mep, nhai ranh Little devil, imp#frog#to imitate; to mimic#to chew; to masticate; to ruminate
nhai con`nhu nhai
nhai lai`Chew the cud, ruminate
nhai nhai`Too lengthy
nhai nhep`nh nhai
nhai quat`(y hoc) Leucoma, leukoma
nhai ranh`nh nhai
nham`Five (coming after twenty, thirty..)#Gnaw at#Irritate#it dung) quick, nimble#The night Heavenly Stem#Unfounded#boring; trite#nhu lam #revise silently, try to memorize#hisper, say under one's breath#thong tuc) Pocket#rough; harsh; rugged#to aim at; to train#to close; to shut (one's eyes)#to fall
nham chuc`Take up an appoinment
nham chung`(dia phuong) Perhaps
nham hiem`Wicked
nham huong`o orientate
nham lan`nhu lam lan
nham le`(dia phuong) prompt
nham luc`At the very moment, at the right instant
nham mat`Close one's eyes
nham nghien`close (one's eyes) tightly
nham nham`nhu lam lam
nham nhang`Blow hot and cold, shuffle
nham nhap`cung noi nham nhap peck at#xem nham nhap#xem nhap (lay)
nham nhay`Wink
nham nhe`(dia phuong) Succeed, make it#(dia phuong) nhu lam le#(khau ngu) Aim at several times (before shooting)#hoose (select) in advance
nham nhi`Untruthful
nham nho`Rough and variegated#nhu lam lo
nham ruou`Eat over sips of alcohol
nham si`(dia phuong) Very rough
nham tai`xem nham
nham thach`(ddi.a) Rock
nhan`Eat with one's fron teeth#thong tuc) Get done, realise#Intermittent (noi ve con dau)#Label, trademark#Press, touch#Send a message to, send word to (someone through someone else)#Smooth, even#lean#ery familiar#crumpled; wrinkled; creasy; furrowed#leisure, idle, free#ring#bitter ; slightly#to agree ; to accept; to acquiesce#o get; to receive#to multiply#man; person#cause#kernel; almond#(ph) mucleus#filling (of cake)#wild goose
nhan ai`compassionate, humane
nhan ap`(y hoc) Ocular tension, eye-tensiobn
nhan ap ke`(y hoc) Tomonetre
nhan ban`humanity
nhan biet`to realize, to recognize ; to identify
nhan bong`Glossy, smooth and shiny
nhan cach`personality
nhan cach hoa`Personify
nhan cam`(sinh ly) Receptor
nhan cau`eyeball
nhan chan`Realize plainly
nhan chim`to dip, to sink
nhan chung`Human race#proof witness
nhan cong`Manpower, hand
nhan dam`Have idle talks, chat
nhan dan`people; country
nhan danh`on behalf of, for the sake of
nhan dao`humanity; humane
nhan dien`Identify
nhan dinh`to judge
nhan dip`on the occasion of
nhan du`to loiter about, to saunter along
nhan duc`humane, hunevolent
nhan duyen`Predestined affinity, predestined marital uniom
nhan gia`(cu) Virtuous people
nhan gioi`Eye's range, eyeshot
nhan giong`(sinh) Multiplication
nhan ha`Leisured, free
nhan hau`humane and upright
nhan hieu`trade-mark
nhan hinh`Anthropomorphous
nhan hoa`Uciversal concord, concord among the people
nhan hoan`(cu) World, eatch
nhan huynh`(cu, kc) My eldest brother, my friend
nhan khau`population
nhan khau hoc`Demography
nhan khoa`ophthalmology
nhan kinh`(cu) Glasses
nhan lam`Look at at one's leisure
nhan loai`mankind; humanity; the human kind
nhan loai hoc`Anthropology
nhan loi`to accept, to agree
nhan luan`(cu) Human morality, human ethics
nhan luc`Manpower#eyesight
nhan man`Overpopulation
nhan mang`Human life
nhan manh`to stress; to emphasize; to press
nhan mat`(xau) Notorious#to identify#to pull a wry face
nhan nai`to endure; to be patient
nhan ngai`(cu) Paramour, lover, sweetheart
nhan nghia`Benevolence and righteousness
nhan ngon`Arsenolite
nhan nha`asy; free; unoccupied
nhan nhan`Somewhat [bitter]#xem nhan (lay)#xem nhan nhan
nhan nhat`xem nhat (lay)
nhan nhe`(dong tu) Send word to
nhan nheo`wrinkled up
nhan nhiu`creased up, wrinkled up
nhan nho`Grin#dong tu. to grinmace, to wry
nhan nhu`Give recommendations to, advise gently
nhan nhuc`Swallow the bitter pill, eat the leek, endure all indignities
nhan nhui`tinh tu. smooth; glabrous
nhan nhum`Wrinkled up
nhan qua`Cause and effect, relation between cause and effect
nhan quan`(cu) Human community#View, range of knowledge
nhan quyen`Human rights, civil rights
nhan ra`to recognize ; to realize
nhan rang`Bare one's teeth, show one's teeth
nhan roi`Leisured, idle, free
nhan sac`beauty
nhan sinh`Human life, human livelihood
nhan sinh quan`Outlook on life
nhan tai`Talent, talented man 
nhan tam`Man's heart#to be cruel; heartless ; merciless
nhan tan`go for a leisurely walk, stroll about leisurely
nhan tao`artificial; made by the art of man
nhan thay`Realize, understand
nhan thin`Smooth, clean[-shaven]
nhan thuc`Taste#to know; to recognize; to conceive
nhan thuc luan`Gnoseology  nhan thuc#ertify
nhan tien`Before one's eyes, in front of one#On the same occasion
nhan tinh`Humanity#mutual feeling between men#cu) nhu nhan ngai
nhan tinh hoa`Humanize, personify
nhan to`Factor
nhan toi`Admit one's sin, acknowledge a fault
nhan trung`Philtrum
nhan tu`clement
nhan van`Human culture, human civilization
nhan vat`personality#haracter
nhan vi`For man's interests, for man's sake#For that reason, therefore, because of the fact that, as
nhan viec`Take up a job
nhan vien`personnel; staff ; member
nhan xet`Comment, judge
nhang`Be entangle, be tangled, be ravelled#onsensical#Behave in a ridiculously domineering way, fuss domineering#Forget#et slip, miss#Nonsensical#Shiny, glossy#Slender; thin and frail#danh tu. bluebottle#incense
nhang khoi`(dia phuong) nhu huong khoi
nhang nhang`Drag out indefinitely#ang on to (somebody)#Insisten#Not thin not fat, slim#Sameless, brazen-faced#xem nhang (lay)
nhang nhao`Impertinent, insolent
nhang nhit`Fuss domineeringly#Maze-like#Perfunctory, by halves
nhang xi`Fuss in a self-important way
nhanh`(dia phuong) Nhanh mep cuoi#o smile paintly, to give a faint smile#branch; limb; bough#fast; rapid; quick
nhanh chong`quick, quickly, swiftly ; prompt, promptly
nhanh gon`Businesslike
nhanh le`Prompt, quick
nhanh mat`Sharp-eyed, quick-eyed
nhanh nhach`xem nhach (lay)
nhanh nhanh`xem nhanh (lay)
nhanh nhau`Agile, vivacious, active, prompt
nhanh nhay`Promt and sensible
nhanh nhe`Prompt and nimble
nhanh nhen`agile; nimble
nhanh tri`quick-minded
nhao`Be in a stir, get uproarious#Fall headlong#nead#Scurry here and there#to laugh at;to mock; to jeer at
nhao bang`Sneer at
nhao lan`Dive
nhao lon`Make loops, make somersaults
nhao nhac`To scurry here and there in all directions looking for (someone, something)#nhu nhao nhac
nhao nhang`nhu nhang nhao
nhao nhao`Mix up#Very pasty#xem nhao (lay)
nhap`(dia phuong) Rough#Bring in, put in, import#oin; add#eceive#cung noi dap Wet#to sip#to move slightly
nhap cang`nhu nhap khau
nhap canh`Enter a country, cross the border of a country#ntry, entrance
nhap cu`Immigrate
nhap cuc`(khau ngu) Run (things) together, join, merge
nhap cuoc`Take part in, be an insider
nhap giong`Take a sip
nhap hoc`Begin the school term
nhap hoi`Be admited to in association
nhap khau`to import
nhap mat`Sleep a wink
nhap mon`(cu) Initiate#ntroductory section
nhap ngu`to enlist; to join the army
nhap nha nhap nhang`xem nhap nhang (lay)
nhap nhang`Show confusion#mbiguous case
nhap nhanh`nhu lap lanh
nhap nhay`Wink, blink, flicker
nhap nhem`Dim, dusky#weak and intermittent
nhap nhoang`Twilight, duck#nhu lap loang
nhap nhom`Be on tenterhooks, be anxious
nhap noi`Introduce, acclimatize, naturalize
nhap quan`Lay out, lay (a corpse) in a coffin
nhap quoc tich`Naturalize, become naturalized
nhap quy`Encash, make an entry to the cash
nhap sieu`Trade deficit
nhat`(ket hop han che) Very small, tiny#insipid; not salted#shy; timid; faint#cut; stab; slash#to pick up; to gather#fast; quick
nhat bao`daily; daily paper ; daily newspaper
nhat dan`One day suddenly
nhat dang`(cu) First-class, first-grade, first-rate
nhat dinh`to decide; to determine
nhat don`be afraid of whipping
nhat dung`Necessary for everyday, for everyday use
nhat gai`shy of girls (said of boys)
nhat gan`Chicken-hearted, weak -hearted
nhat giap`(cu) First grade (doctorate)
nhat gung`Tra loi nhat gung#o giveone-word answers
nhat hang`Superlatively
nhat ky`iary; journal
nhat la`First and foremost, in the first place, especially
nhat lam`(cu) At a glance
nhat lenh`Order of the day
nhat loat`All and sundry, one and all
nhat luat`All and sundry
nhat muc`Steadfastly, persistently (noi ve viec tu choi)
nhat nguyen`Monogenetic
nhat nguyen luan`Monism
nhat nguyet`the sun and the moon
nhat nhanh`Clear up, clear away
nhat nheo`tasteless, insipid#ool
nhat pheo`xem pheo
nhat quan`consistant
nhat quy`(thuc vat) Sunflower
nhat quyet`determined, resolute
nhat sinh`All one's life
nhat tam`(cu; it dung) Be of one mind, be unanimous
nhat te`To a man
nhat than giao`Monotheism
nhat thech`Extremely insipid, unsavoury
nhat thiet`Absolutely necessary, imperative
nhat thoi`Temporarily, transiently
nhat thong`(cu) Unify, bring together into one whole (system...)
nhat thuc`solar eclipse
nhat tri`unanimous ; in chorus
nhat trinh`(cu) Daily [newspaper]
nhat tung`Daily (prayer)
nhat vien che`(chinh tri) Monocameralism
nhat xa`Solar radiation
nhau`placenta. together;in company#rumpled; tumbled; creasy#to drink wine
nhau nhau`(it dung) Coarse, vulgar#Rush (run) in a pack
nhau nhet`(dia phuong) Booze
nhay`Jump#et oneself promoted rapidly and illegitimately to the presidency#ance#over#skip#Lengthy#s if with a saw#Moth#Sensitive#rompt, quick#Shiny as with grease#Sticky, slimy#to blink; to wink#to dance#to nibble
nhay ben`Have a flair for
nhay bo`rush headlong
nhay cam`highly discerning, very
nhay cang`Lead for joy
nhay cao`High jump
nhay coc`Skip
nhay cuu`Leap-frog
nhay dam`(cu) Dance
nhay day`Skip
nhay du`to parachute; to drop by parachute
nhay mat`Wink#winkle, twinkling
nhay mieng`Have a quick tongue, be quick-tongued and answer before one is spoken to
nhay mua`Perform dances, perform a ballet. jump for joy
nhay mui`(dia phuong) Sneeze
nhay nhay`Inversed commas, quotes, quotations marks#o-called#xem nhay (lay)#xem nhay (lay)#xem nhay (lay)#xem nhay (lay)
nhay nhot`Jump for joy#Snotty all over
nhay nhua`Slimy, slippery with slush
nhay o`Hopscotch (children's game)#Visit nests (of hens, before laying)
nhay rao`Hurdle-race
nhay sao`to pole-vault
nhay tot`Jump nimbly on
nhay vot`to leap
nhay xa`long-jump
nhay xo`Bounce upon
nhe`(dia phuong) nhu le#Alim (only at a given target)#ake use of, take advantage of#nived#oakingly#Bare (one's teeth), show (one's teeth)#Right#Winkle out, extract#light
nhe bong`feather light
nhe bung`nhu nhe da
nhe buoc`Walk gingerly, tread lightly
nhe da`credulous; gullible, easily decived
nhe loi`Mild-spoken, soft-spoken
nhe mieng`Speak throughtlessly
nhe minh`Have one's mind at peace
nhe nhang`Light#ild; gentle
nhe nhoi`(it dung) Make fun of, make sport of
nhe nhom`Light#legantly slender
nhe no`Have a load taken off one's mind
nhe tay`Handle with care#andle with kid gloves
nhe tenh`Excessively light
nhe tinh`Make light of (some) feeling#nhu nhe da 
nhem`(dia phuong)#(khau ngu) Secret#Be mucous#hu lem_nhem#etty
nhem nhem`Without giving one's mouth a rest
nhem nhem nhem`xem nhem
nhem nhep`Sticky, slimy
nhem nhua`Soiled sullied
nhem nhuoc`Smeared all over
nhen`(it dung) Prompt and nimble#Kindle, light#spider 
nhenh nhang`At leisure
nheo`Flabby, flaccid#nhu nheo#nheo nheo (lay, y tang)#xem ca nheo#lose slightly (one eye)
nheo nheo`Call stridently and insistently#Prattle glibly#nh nheo (nghia manh hon)#weakly and whimpering (noi ve tre em)#xem nheo (lay)
nheo nhoc`(of children) to be neglected; uncared for
nhet`stuff, cram#ack#lip
nheu nhao`Flabby, flaccid#leu lao, Chew roughly
nhi`(slang) betty, little#Inn't it, doesn't it..#on't you think so#ear#nhi khoa (noi tat)
nhi cai`(thuc vat) Pistil
nhi dien`(toan) Dihedral
nhi dong`young child
nhi duc`(thuc vat) Stamen
nhi giap`(cu) Second grade (doctorate)
nhi hi`Newly-weds first visit to the bride ' s family (one the wedding day's morrow)
nhi khoa`paediatrics
nhi muc`(it dung) Ear and eye
nhi nguyen`Dualistic
nhi nguyen luan`Dualism
nhi nha nhi nhanh`xem nhi nhanh (lay)
nhi nha nhi nhoen`xem nhi nhoen (lay)
nhi nhang`average, midling
nhi nhanh`joyful, playful
nhi nhay`Fidget
nhi nheo`Yell#importune
nhi nhi`Whisper uninter lligibly
nhi nho`Higgledy-piggledy; at sixes and sevens
nhi nhoen`Smile playfully
nhi nu`(cu) The weaker sex
nhi pham`Civilian second mandarin grade
nhi phan`(toan) Binary
nhi tam`Double-faced, double-dealing
nhi trung am`diphthong
nhi vien che`(chinh tri) Bicameralism
nhich`Inch
nhiec`Make ironical remarks about (someone)
nhiec mang`nhu mang nhiec
nhiec moc`Humiliate (someone) with remarks on his defects
nhiem`Catch, contract, acquire
nhiem ban`Be polluted
nhiem benh`Contrac a disease
nhiem binh`o catch a disease
nhiem chuc`nhu nham chuc
nhiem dien`Electrize
nhiem doc`Be intoxicated, be affected by toxicosis
nhiem khuan`(y hoc) Be infected
nhiem ky`erm of office; tenure of office
nhiem mau`marvellous
nhiem sac`chromatism
nhiem sac the`Chromosome
nhiem so`Seat, office
nhiem trung`Be infected
nhiem tu`(vat ly) Magnetize
nhiem vu`duty; mission
nhiem xa`be affected by radioactivity
nhien`nhu nhuyen nghia 1
nhien hau`(cu) Then
nhien lieu`fuel; combustible; firing
nhiep anh`to photograph; to take a photograph
nhiep chinh`Act as a regent
nhiet`Heat
nhiet bieu`Thermometer
nhiet do`temperature; degree of heat
nhiet doi`Tropic (torrid) zone
nhiet doi hoa`Tropicalize
nhiet dong hoc`Thermodynamics
nhiet dung`Thermal capacity
nhiet giai`Temperature scale
nhiet hach`Thermonuclear
nhiet hoa hoc`Thremochemistry
nhiet hoc`Thremology
nhiet huyet`Zeal, enthusiansm
nhiet ke`Thremometer
nhiet liet`warmly; vehement; wild; vleanic
nhiet luong`calorie; calory
nhiet luong ke`Calorimeter
nhiet luyen`Thremal treatment
nhiet nang`Calorific energy
nhiet phan`(hoa hoc) Pyrolysis.#vat ly) thremolysis
nhiet quyen`(dia ly) Thremosphere
nhiet tam`Zeal
nhiet thanh`Fervent
nhiet tinh`Enthusiasm, ardour
nhieu`(cu) Exemption from corvees#erson exempt from corvees#Crepe#ester, trouble#am#numerous; abundant; very much; much; many;several; a great deal
nhieu chan`(dong vat) Myriadod
nhieu chuyen`nhu lam chuyen#xem nhieu su Prove troublesome
nhieu khe`Complicated, complex
nhieu loi`garrulous; loquacious
nhieu nhan`nhu nhieu (dung voi y phu dinh)
nhieu nhuong`trouble
nhieu su`nhu nhieu chuyen
nhieu tien`ich; wealthy
nhieu xa`(vat ly) diffract
nhim`Porcupine
nhim bien`(dong vaat) Sea urchin
nhin`(dia phuong) Lay by part of, save#Endure#o without, suppress#to look (at)
nhin chung`On the whole, as a whole
nhin doi`to abstain from food
nhin nhan`to acknowledge; to recognize; to admit
nhin nho`Look after
nhin nhuc`to digest an insult
nhin noi`Stereoscopic
nhin thau`seethrough
nhin thay`to see
nhinh`better ; bigger
nhinh nhinh`xem nhinh (lay)
nhip`rhythm; cadence; measure; time#span#to drum#tweezers#to extract with tweezers
nhip dieu`Rhythm#nhu nhip_do
nhip do`Rate, speed
nhip nhang`Well-balanced, harmonious, in harmony#he plans of the various branches of activityare fulfiled in a harmonious way#ythmic[al]
nhiu`Knit (the brows)#titch summarily#cung noi noi nhiu Say one word for another, make a slip of the tongue
nho`Just out, protrude, project#Of medium size, medium-sized#nho nho (lay)#To miss#nhu lo#Soot#ooty, soot-smeared#Spit#Pull up, pull out, extract#String, fine cord#cung noi lo) Sweetish#nho nho (lay,y giam)#dirty; filthy#grapes#small; little; petty; young#to commision. to be dependent on#to remember; to recall; to call in mind
nho ban`Filthy, dirty unclean
nho be`Small, diminutive
nho cay`Depend on someone for
nho chung`Remember vaguely, remember approximately
nho co`to pluck up weeds
nho con`Of a small stature
nho dai`Them nho dai#o have one's mouth watering#Too young
nho danh`sully, smear (someone's) name
nho doi`Remember (something) all one's life#Shameful
nho gia`confucianist
nho giao`confuciannism
nho giot`In drops, by drop
nho hep`Narrow
nho hoc`confucianism
nho lai`(cu) Clerk#Reminisce
nho lam`Confucianist circles, Confucian scholardom
nho lua`[Over] a low fire
nho mon`Maen, mean-mindled, humble, negligible
nho mong`Long to see
nho neo`Weigh anchor
nho nguoi`Pretty little, slender
nho nha`homesick; to be sick for home#refined; cultured; elegant
nho nhang`(dia phuong) nhu lo lang #nhu lo lang
nho nhat`mean, trifling, trivial
nho nhe`soft; gently; mild#timorous, shy
nho nhem`nhu lo lem Smeared
nho nhen`mean
nho nho`somewhat little, tinyish#xem nho#xem nho (lay)#xem nho (lay)#xem nho (lay)
nho nhoe`Have pretensions to
nho nhoi`Small, little, humble
nho nhop`Filthy, mucky
nho nhung`Have a fond remembrance (of someone, of some place)
nho nhuoc`dishonoured; disgraceful
nho noi`Soot
nho phong`Confucian scholar's manners
nho ra`Recollect, recall
nho rang`o draw a tooth; to take out a tooth
nho sao`Unmoor
nho si`confucian scholar
nho sinh`(cu) Student
nho thuong`Long fondly to see, grieve for
nho ti`Very small, tiny
nho tiec`Think with deep regret of
nho to`Coo
nho trai`Strike (break up) camp
nho troi`Thank heaven!
nho tuoi`Still very young in age
nho va`Depend on (somebody) for help
nho xiu`Very small, diminutive
nho yeu`Small and weak
nhoa`Be dimmed, be obscured#ade
nhoai`Be dead tired, be faint with exhaustion#Strive to come up (from water)
nhoang`Flash
nhoay nhoay`xem nhoay (lay)
nhoc`Brat#Tire, tiring
nhoc long`Worry; be anxious
nhoc nhan`tired; fatigued
nhoc oc`Tire one's mind
nhoe`Blur
nhoe nhoe`xem nhoe (lay)
nhoe nhoet`Messily pulpy, messy#xem nhoe
nhoe'`Sudden scream#nhoe nhoe (lay, y tang)
nhoen nhoen`xem nhoen
nhoi`(dia phuong) Chew the cud (noi ve trau bo)#(dia phuong) Frolic, grambol#(dia phuong) nhu loi #(thuc vat) Bischofia#Emerge#Feeling stinging pain#Stuff, cram, line, fill#verfeed (poultry).#dia phuong) nhu nhao#xem noi
nhoi bot`o knead flour
nhoi mau`(y hoc) Infact
nhoi nhet`Cram, fill (one's stomach)
nhoi nhoi`xem nhoi (lay)
nhoi so`to stuff (sb's head)
nhom`Like a lath, like a water#Peep#Sit up suddenly#aluminium; (US) aluminum#nhu nhom#to gather; to group; to collect#group
nhom hop`Gather, convene, meet
nhom mau`(y hoc) Blood group
nhom nham`Smeared, dirty#cung noi nhom nhoam Munch piggidhly
nhom nhem`Have a smattering of#Munch slowly
nhom nho`Pry into, pry about#nhu nham nho
nhom nhoam`nhu nhom nham
nhom nhop`xem nhop (lay)
nhom truong`group leader
nhom vien`Group member
nhon`(dia phuong) Play away one's time#(dia phuong) nhu lon#(dia phuong) nhu nhan nhon nhon#ut on a brazen face#Greasy#Only one left#Pinch#iptoe#nhu nhan#sharp; pointed; acute#to bustle ; to be disturbed
nhon hoat`Very sharp-pointed
nhon nha nhon nhac`xem nhon nhac (lay)
nhon nhac`Look around in bewilderment
nhon nhang`Bustling
nhon nhao`(it dung) Be all in a stir, be agog#Be in a stir, be alarmed#eel upset#[Be] helter-skelter, [be] in a pandemonium
nhon nhen`(dia phuong)#Peck at
nhon nhip`bustling
nhon nhon`Kight-footed
nhon nhot`Somethat sour,sourish, somewhat acid#xem nhot (lay)#xem nhot (lay)#xem nhot (lay)
nhong`(chim) rackle#Lank, lanky#cu) Generation, age-group#agama#pupa
nhong nha nhong nhanh`xem nhong nhanh
nhong nhanh`Behave in a flirtatious manner, have flirtatious manner
nhong nhong`Tintinnabulation, tinkling of a horse-harness bells#Wait for long on tiptoe#Wander idly about, loiter about
nhop nhep`Munching noise
nhot`Boil#Oleaster (cay).#thong tuc) Pinch, steal#khau ngu) Steal away; give the slip; slink out#Pale#motor oil#slimy; viscous#tickled#to shut up; to confine; to impound
nhot ke`(vat ly) Viscometer,viscosimeter
nhot nhat`Slimy #Very pale
nhot nhot`Very slimy, very viscous
nhu`(ket hop han che) Flexible, pliant#Be well-cooked, be well-done#eel a pervasive pain (numbness...)#Begin to show, sprout#Instruct carefully#dia phuong) Tell,say#Tantalize#as#like#alike; similar to#to lure, to entice, to snare
nhu ai`Like any other (person)
nhu cau`need; want; demand; requirement
nhu choi`[Like] child's play
nhu cu`As before, as previously
nhu da`nhu thach nhu
nhu dao`Judo
nhu dich`Bot) latex
nhu don`Get a sound beating
nhu dong`peristaltic
nhu het`As like as two peas
nhu huong`Frankincense
nhu khong`As if nothing had happened
nhu la`As if
nhu mau`Wet nurse
nhu mi`modest; humble; gentle
nhu nguyen`(cu) In accordance with one's wishes
nhu nhau`Identical
nhu nhu`xem nhu (lay)
nhu nhuoc`feeble; faint; weak
nhu phi`(it dung) Costs
nhu qua`If really
nhu the`Like#s if, as though#like this; like that; thus; so; such
nhu thuat`Jiu-jitsu, ju-jitsu
nhu tren`Idem, ditto
nhu tu`Half-dead within an inch of one's life
nhu tuong`It seems#emulsion
nhu vay`like that ;#like this
nhu y`One's liking
nhu yeu`Of prime necessity, necessary
nhu yeu pham`Necessities, necessaries
nhua`(Bot) resin; gum; asphalt
nhua ket`Gutta-percha
nhua song`sap; vigour; energy
nhua thong`Pine resin
nhuan trang`Laxative, aperient
nhuan truong`Med) laxative ; aperient
nhuc`to ache; smarting#to be disgraced; dishonoured#oflesh
nhuc dau khau`nutmeg
nhuc duc`carnal; fleshy; sexual; concupiscence
nhuc hinh`corporal punishment
nhuc ma`to insult, to abuse
nhuc nha`disgraceful; ignominious; shameful
nhuc nhan`Humiliatory
nhuc nhoi`Fell a lasting sting smart#nhu nhuc nhoi
nhuc oc`Fell a head-splitting pain
nhuc rang`toothache
nhuc the`ody,  flesh
nhue binh`(cu) Well-trained men
nhue khi`ardent; zealous
nhue nhoa`Perfunctorily, by halves
nhui`(dia phuong) nhu giui#Push in#Rake net#ish with a rake-net#rout; remove with its snout (of a pig)#reep
nhun`Courteous and modest#ery soft#Crouch, flex the legs#Shrug (xem nhun vai).#Modest#Pulpy#ain
nhun nao`(y hoc) Encephalomalacia
nhun nhan`Modest and courteous
nhun nhun`xem nhun (lay)
nhun nhuong`to be modest; humble
nhun vai`Shrug one's shoulders
nhun xuong`(y hoc) Osteomalacia
nhung`Certain number of, some#s much as, as many as#chi so nhieu, khong dich)#othing but#requently, usually#Worry, harass, trouble#but; yet#to steep; to soak; to dip; to immerse#velvet#young antler
nhung ai`Any
nhung ke`Corduroy
nhung la`Repeatedly.#Nguyen Du) One wished and hoped repeatedly
nhung lam`Harass and take bribe
nhung ma`But
nhung mau`Blood stained
nhung nhang`Bustle about ineffciently#Dilly-dally, shilly-shally#Hang on#Refuse to listen to
nhung nhieu`Harass, pester
nhung nhu`As for, as far as... is concerned
nhung nhuc`nhu luc nhuc#xem nhuc (lay)
nhung phuc`(cu) (cung noi nhung y) Combat uniform
nhung tay`Have a hand in, bear a hand in
nhung vai`Velveteen
nhung y`(cu) nhu nhung phuc
nhuoc`Sullying, discrediting#Tire, get tired, get weary#pend much energy
nhuoc bang`If, in case
nhuoc diem`weak-point;
nhuoc nho`nhu nho nhuoc
nhuoc tieu`Weak, small and weak
nhuom`Tint.#he years had tinted half of his hair grey#to dye
nhuom benh`Begin to catch (to contract) a disease
nhuong`Be self-denying, show self-denial, yield, give up what is one's due#nhu duong#Sell, cede
nhuong ay`That much; that many
nhuong bao`How much, how many, how
nhuong bo`to make concessions; to give in
nhuong buoc`Give way (to somebody)
nhuong dia`Territory conceded (to foreign country), connession
nhuong lai`to cede; give up
nhuong loi`Give [up] the floor
nhuong nao`How much, how very
nhuong ngoi`Cede the throne, abdicade (in favour of)
nhuong nhin`to make concessions
nhut`(dia phuong) Salad of salted bits of jack fruit..#(dia phuong) nhu nhat#(dia phuong) nhu nhat (trong cac to hop)#Blunt#et damped, get dampened, weaken
nhut nhat`Timid, shy
nhuy`(thuc vat) Pistil
nhuyen`Well-kneaded#oft and smooth
ni`(dia phuong) Here#(dia phuong) This#nh ni#his man#ow#uddhist nun#wool; felt
ni co`budhist nun
ni long`ylon
ni non`Coo confidences, have a heart-to-heart talk#e full of melody, be harmonious
ni to`nitrogen
nia`fork#large and flat basket
nich`As iron, as deal board#ninh nich (lay, y tang)#to cram, to stuff. to line. to pack
niem`(dung truoc danh tu chi tam trang, ham y tich cuc, khong dich)#Pray under one's breath (in a whisper)#seal
niem dich`(sinh vat) Mucus
niem luat`prosody
niem mac`(sinh vaat) Mucous membrane
niem no`warm
niem phong`to seal
niem tay`Inmost feelings, personal considerations
niem yet`to post a bill
nien`Hoop (put round a barrel...)#im (of a wheel)#year
nien bieu`Chronicle, chronology, choronological table
nien canh`Birth date
nien dai`age, date ; era
nien dai hoc`Chronology
nien giam`year book
nien hieu`Name of a reign's years
nien hoc`(it dung) nhu nam hoc
nien khoa`School year, academic year
nien kim`Annuity
nien lich`Almanach
nien thieu`Young, tender
nien xi`Age
nieng`xem ca nieng#thong tuc) cu nieng Zizania
nieng nieng`xem ca nieng
niet`Cord for cattle#ind, fasten, tie fast
niet ban`nhu nat ban
nieu`Small [cooking-]pot#Urinary
nieu thieu`outh; flower of age
nin`to be silent; to hold one's tongue
nin bat`Stop short crying
nin khoc`o stop crying; to leave off crying
nin lang`Be silent, give no answer
nin nhin`Contain oneself
nin thinh`Keep silent, give no answer
nin thit`To remain in patient silence
nin tieng`Keep mum, lie low
ninh`Flatter, fawn on, fawn upon#Simmer, stew
ninh bo`Toady (to somebody)
ninh dam`(thong tuc)Gallant
ninh gia`(cu) Pay a bridal visit to one's parents
ninh hot`to flatter; to adulate
ninh mat`(khau ngu) Flatterer (of a lookingglass)
ninh nich`xem nich (lay)#xem nich (lay)
ninh not`nhu ninh
ninh than`Sycophantic courtier, sycophant
nip`(cu) Trunk, case (for clothes, books...)
nit`Garter.#dia phuong) Belt#elt#it tightly#Small wine-bottle
nit vu`(dia phuong) Brassiere
niu`dong tu. to grab; to cling; to catch
no`(dia phuong) That#(dia phuong) nhu no Cross-bow, arbalest#ntimidate#(thong tuc) Prick, cock#rotruding axle#eep imbedded fruit stalk#[Hubble-bubble pipe] bowl#Amount, sum#Fish trap#Frolic, gambol#Frolic, gambol#Have the heart to#That, the other (day)#here, over there#arbalot; cross-bow#bow#debt#to owe#gorged; surfeited#he#Him#t#to bloom; to blow; to open out#o be hatched#to explode; to blow up ; to burst
no am`Have adequate food and clothing
no boc`(cu) Servant
no bung`Burst, break out
no cham`Delayed-action
no dia`Be over head and ears in debt
no dich`Enslave, subdue, subjugate
no doi`Debt to society
no du`Comfortably off
no dua`to frolic
no gion`nhu no dua
no hoa`(bong) Become more beautiful
no khi`Fit of anger
no le`slave
no luc`Exert all one's strength, exert oneself to the utmost
no mau`Blood debt
no mieng`Bread-and-butter debt, return invitation to dinner#nhu no mom
no min`Set off (explode) a mine
no mom`Protest loudly; talk loudly
no mui`(thong tuc) Be beaming (swollen) with pride
no nan`Debt
no nang`Knowing how to contrive, like a good contriver#Well-developed
no nao`Have the heart to do something
no nat`Intimidate
no ne`To satiety
no nuc`flock
no nuoc`Duty (obligation toward one's country
no nuong`nhu non nuong
no sung`dong tu. to fire
no tam`Have the heart to
no to`ave the heart to
no tung`Blow up
no xuyt`xem xuyt
noan`(sinh vat) Ovule
noan bao`(sinh vat) Oocyte
noc`(dia phuong) Small boat.#dia phuong) Gulp#Roof-top, top#dat truoc dt, chi mot don vi nha)#venom; poison#stake; pile
noc co`nhu noc
noc doc`Venom, poison
noi`(cu,van chuong) Field.#he looked melancholically at the field of withered grass.#cu) People's living quarters#ome-made#aternal, on the spear side#oyal (imperial) palace#Be better off#Feeling#Follow#Race#edigree[d]#thong tuc) Crack#cung noi nhoi Cradle#place#pot#to float; to overfloat#o rise; to develop#e brought out#to join; to add; to unite; to connect#to loosen ; to ease; to slacken#to speak; to talk; to say; to tell
noi ap suat`Pressure- cooker
noi bao`(sinh vat) Intracelluler
noi bat`Be brought in relief, stand out in relief
noi bay`Incite#to talk nonsense
noi bem`Have the gift of the gab
noi bien`Internal trouble
noi bo`internal
noi bon`nh noi bong
noi bong`Speak by hints, drop hints#cung noi noi bon Speak jestingly, crack jokes
noi bot`Foam
noi bua`Speak thoughtlessly
noi cac`cabinet
noi canh`Speak by innuendoes; make oblique hints
noi chien`civilwar
noi chim`Full of vicissitudes, full of ups and downs
noi chinh`domestic policy; domestic administration
noi cho`Steamer
noi choc`cung noi noi tuc Pin-prick
noi choi`nhu noi dua
noi chu`Use highbrow terms (when speaking)
noi chung`Generally speaking
noi chuyen`to talk
noi cong`inner force; strangth
noi cung`Harem#Put on a bold front
noi danh`Become famous, win widespread fame.
noi day`Rise up
noi dia`inland; interior
noi dien`Fly into a fit of madness
noi doa`(dia phuong) nhu noi gian
noi doc`Boast, brag
noi doc to`(y hoc) Endotoxin
noi doi`Continue the ancestral line, carry on the lineage#to lie; to tell lies
noi dong`Interior field#Throw out innuendoes
noi dong tu`intransitive verb
noi dua`to joke
noi dung`tenor ; terms
noi duoi`Follow one another, life in, queue up
noi gat`Mislead (by lying)
noi gau`Chat [away]
noi gia`Decrease somewhat in price (noi ve hang hoa)
noi gian`Ennuch#planted spy#to grow angry
noi gieu`Mock, jeer at, make fun of
noi gion`nhu noi bong
noi giong`Race
noi gium`to intercede, to speak on behalf of
noi go`Speak ominously
noi got`Follow the example of, tread in the steps of#Tread in the footsteps of one's seniors
noi ham`(triet hoc) Connotation, comprehension
noi hap`Autoclave
noi hien`(triet hoc) Interiorize
noi ho`Blunder out#nhu
noi hoa`home made; locally made
noi hoi`boiler
noi hon`Endogemy
noi hot`Tell tales
noi kho`Expatiate (elaborate) on one's diffculties#Very intimate, bosom (friend)
noi khoa`Internal medicine#curriculum
noi khung`nhu noi gian
noi ky sinh`(sinh vat) Endoparasite
noi la`Reportedly, supposedly
noi lai`Rejoin#enew#to use slang when speaking
noi lam`cung noi noi mham Speak by mistake
noi lang`Shift over to another subject, change subjects
noi lao`to lie; to tell a falschool
noi lap`to stammer, to stutter
noi lay`Speak back-slang
noi len`Float#ise#istinguish oneself#to voice ; to say, to tell
noi leu`Speak saucily
noi lien`Connect
noi lieu`to speak rashly
noi loan`Internal upheaval#Rebel, revolt
noi loi`Speak recitatives#Take over the floor (from someone)
noi long`One's inmost feelings#to use slang
noi lot`Put in a good word (with unfluential people, for someone)
noi lua`Make (build) a fire
noi luc`Internal force
noi lung`nh noi luong
noi luong`cung noi noi lung Quibble
noi mat`say a few sweetly ironical words
noi me`Speak in one's sleep#ave in delirium
noi mep`Be smooth-tongued. Chi hay noi mep,
noi mia`Ironize
noi minh`One's personal lot, one's personal plight.
noi mo`Guess
noi nang`Internal energy#to speak
noi nghiep`to take over; to take up; to succeed a business
noi ngoai`Parernal side and maternal side
noi ngoi`Succeed to the throne
noi nha`One's family situation, one's family plight
noi nhan`(cu) My wife, my old woman (thong tuc)
noi nhap`(tam ly) Introjection
noi nhat`Within a day
noi niem`cung noi noi rieng Innermost feelings, confidence.
noi nieu`Post and pans
noi noi`Everywhere, in every place
noi nong`Lose one's temper
noi phach`Boast, rant
noi phai`Talk sense
noi phet`(thong tuc) nhu noi khoac
noi phiem`Chat
noi qua`Speak summarily, give a cursory expositon
noi quanh`to beat about the bush
noi quy`Intramural regulations
noi rang`Roasting pot
noi rao`Take oratory precautions, be guarded in what one says
noi rieng`Speak (with somebody) in private, have a word in sombodys' ear#n particular#nhu noi niem
noi ro`Clarify#Stand out in relief
noi ruoc`Exaggerate
noi sai`Tell untruths, lie
noi sang`Rave [in delirium]
noi soi`xem soi
noi song`Speak up, speak outone's mind
noi suong`Have a long tongue but a short hand
noi tai`Immanent, inherent
noi tam`Innermost feelings, what is in one's heart of hearts
noi tam banh`(khau ngu) Get into a tantrum
noi tang`Innards, viscera
noi tay`Relax one's severity.
noi thach`xem thach nghiaa 1
noi tham`Whisper, speak under one's breath
noi thang`Speak directly to#Speak up, speak out one's mind; speak plainly
noi thanh`A city's inlying areas, urban areas
noi thanh tuong`cung noi noi thanh noi tuong To speak braggingly, to rant
noi that`Interior#to speak the truth
noi thi`(cu) Court sevant
noi thuong`internal disease
noi tieng`celebrated; illustrious; famous; well-known
noi tiep`(toan hoc) Inscribed#Succeed
noi tiet`ndocrical
noi tiet to`Hormone
noi tinh`(tam) Introspection#Internal situation
noi toac`nhu noi trang 
noi toet`nhu noi trang
noi trai`Euphemize
noi trang`Speak bluntly#Talk big, brag, boast
noi tri`Home affairs, home administration, home policy, internal affairs,internal policy, internal administration
noi tro`houseword
noi trong`(dia phuong) Throw out vague innuendoes
noi trong khong`Speak to empty benches
noi tru`resident in, stay-in
noi tuong`(cu) Wife, lady of the house#Boast, rant, talk big
noi ung`Fifth columnish, Trojan horse
noi vu`home affairs
noi xau`Speak ill of, backbite
noi xung`nhu nhoi gian
nom`Chinese-transcribed Vietnamese#Prose-like, simple, easy to understand#In opposition to the Chinese's Han language, Nom (slantingly pronounced from "Nam") language belonged to Viet ethnic group. It borrowed the Han hieroglyphic scripts to transcribe the Vietnamese language. Nom language might appear in the 8th century. The memorable poems in Nom language belonged to Han Thuyen and Nguyen Si Co (in the late 13th century) The birth of Nom language not only marked the Viet people's mature national consciousness, but also brought a brilliant development to the Vietnamese literature between the late 18th and early 19th centuries. For complication and imperfection, Nom language was replaced by quoc ngu (national language)#Monkey#South-easterly (wind)#umid#Sweet and sour grated salad#om is a combination of a variety of fresh vegetables, considered to be salad in Western countries. The main ingredients include grated pieces of turnip, cabbage or papaya and slices of cucumber with grated boiled lean pork. Other auxiliary ingredients are grated carrot, slices of hot chilly and broken roasted groundnuts. These are used to make the dish more colourful. All are mixed thoroughly before being soaked in vinegar, sugar, garlic, hot chilly and seasoned with salt. The mixture of ingredients is put into a dish before being covered with some spicy vegetables. To try a mouthful of Nom is to enjoy a combination of all the tastes, including sour, hot, sweet, salty and fragrant. The dish helps digest at meal and party times. It can become an addictive aid to assist the real connoisseur to enjoy more food#Take a good look at, peer at#ook after, mind#Tinder#fishing-tackle
nom na`nhu nom nghia 2
nom nop`[Be] on tenterhooks, [be] in a state of suspense
non`Handful#Mountain#oung, tender, green#remature#ot up to the mark#ew#ild#Tender bud#ender, very soft#cung noi mua Vomit, throw up.#dia phuong) Be bursting to#dia phuong) Feel tickled#hat
non chop`(cu) Metal-topped conical hat
non cut`(toan) Truncated cone
non dau`(lich su) Soldier's conical hat
non la`Palm-leaf conical hat
non long`(cu) Feather hat
non me`Worn-out conical hat, hoopless palm hat
non mua`xem non
non na`White and silkly, velvety and white
non nao`Feel sick
non nong`Be eager to, be bursting to#verhasty
non not`Young, tender, green
non nuoc`fatherland
non nuong`Lingam and yoni
non quai thao`(cu) Flat palm hat with fringes
non song`Home country, homeland
non tay`Unskilled in drawing
non tre`Of tender age#oung
nong`(dia phuong) Broad flat drying basket#laiting model#rop up#it dung) Spoil#Broad flat drying basket#tretch#nsert#Core#tretcher#arrel#nsert, fit in#Hot#trong#arm, ardent, fervid.#Neck (flesh of an animal's neck)#hot; warm; fervet#hot-tempered; quick tempered#shallow ; superficial; not deep
nong bong`xem bong
nong buc`Sultry, oppressively hot
nong can`superficial; shallow
nong chay`Ardent, fervid#Melt
nong choen`Unnoticeably shallow
nong cong nghiep`Argo-industrial
nong cu`Farming implement
nong dan`farmer ; cultivator
nong do`(hoa hoc) Concentration
nong duom`Ardent and deep-felt (of sentiments)
nong gay`(khau ngu) Get keyed up
nong gia`(cu) Cultivator, agriculturist
nong gian`Get furious
nong giang`Irrigation canal
nong hau`warm
nong ho`Farmer household
nong hoa hoc`Argo-chemistry
nong hoc`Argonomy
nong hoi`Peasants' association#Steaming hot, hot
nong lam`Agriculture and silvicultue, agriculture and forestry
nong lich`Farming calendar
nong long`impatient; anxious
nong mat`Burn with anger#nhu nong mat
nong na`Exert oneself to the utmost
nong nac`Very strong
nong nan`deep; intense
nong nay`Hot-tempered
nong nghiep`Agriculture, farming#EREMONIES STILL AT THE HEART OF AGRICULTURE IN VIETNAM: Le Ha Dien is a popular ceremony which bears a religious significance for Vietnamese farmers. During the ceremony, farmers pray to heaven to grant them blessings. As Vietnam is an agricultural country where labour-intensive wet-rice is grown, the life of the majority of people is closely linked with the land. Hence, almost all ceremonies and rituals are connected with farming. Wet-rice is grown in very difficult natural conditions, especially in the Red River Delta and central Vietnam where natural calamities - typhoons, flooding, drought and pests - are a constant menace for the peasantry. In the past, in the absence of science and technology, Vietnamese farmers believed in mysterious forces which decided their success or failure. This faith is found in such folk songs as "Thanks to heaven which grants us good weather conditions" or "I pray to heaven to bring rain so that I can have enough water to drink and cover my fields". Heaven (or Troi in Vietnamese) is a common appellation for the spirit world. The belief in the power of spirits is handed down from generation to generation, so that even now our farmers turn to spirits for assistance. Hence the existence of so many farming-related ceremonies. In the past, there were two main rice crops: the Mua and the Chiem Depending on climate and local understanding, farmers regard the Chiem as the main crop, or vice versa. For this reason, Le Ha Dien differs from one region to another. In many villages, the ceremony is regarded as a major event in the life of the peasantry. Although the ceremonies may differ in scale, the rituals have many common features. On the day of the ceremony, early in the morning, village notables called Gia Lang (elder people) in the central highlands make their way to the communal house where other villagers await. There they pay tribute to Thanh Hoang (tutelary god) and Than Nong (god of agriculture) and other divinities; begging them to bring security, prosperity and bumper crops. Afterwards, the villagers head to a chosen location, usually not too far from the communal house, where the ceremony inaugurating the farming season takes place. In a first-class rice field already meticulously ploughed and harrowed, a bamboo tree is planted with all its branches and leaves. The tree is called Cay Ne^u. Ears of rice are attached to the top of the tree, and having reported to the god of agriculture, they start the ceremony proper. To start the ball rolling, a rice transplant ritual is performed. For this, many Chua Dong (Field Lords) are selected. In some villages, only one Chua Dong is singled out. They are mostly elderly people, versed in farming techniques and the soil. In addition, they must be kind-hearted people having extended families whose members live in perfect concord. Last but not least, they should not be mourning People hope that the good qualities of the Chua Dong will blend into the rice plants and impart great vitality to them. Having paid their respects to the god of agriculture, the Chua Dong step into the field and transplant rice around the bamboo tree. In the meantime, the villagers shout cheerfully and beat drums (mimicking natural disaster), targeting the Chua Dong. If these people can stand firm on their feet and manage to perform their task well, people believe that their wish will come true Le Ha Dien is held in a very simple way, but it is very dear to the  farmers. They pin all their hopes on the good health, prosperity and happiness that the ceremony promises. Furthermore, it is in this ceremony that the spirit of the community comes to the surface. In their hearts, everyone pledges to join forces for the common cause
nong nhiet`Warm, ardent, fervid
nong nong`Stark naked, stripped to the buff#xem nong (lay)
nong nuc`Oppressively hot#Sultry#nhu nong buc
nong ray`Burning hot
nong ruot`Burn with impatience
nong san`agricultural produce; farm produce
nong sang`(ly, ky thuat) Incandescent
nong so`Shallow, not deep
nong sot`Steaming hot, boiling hot#ot, red-hot
nong tang`(cu) Agriculture and silk-worm breeding
nong tham`Passionate, ardent
nong thon`Countryside, country
nong trai`Farm
nong trang`Farm
nong truong`Sovkhoz, state-run farm
nong van`(cu) Agritation and propaganda among the peasant agitprop
nong vu`(it dung) Farming season, agricultural crop
nop`Small bamboo lattice hut, small mat hut (on a boat... to slip in)#hand in, pay
not`spot; mark; (Bot) cecidium; gall#to finish
not re`(thuc vat) Nodosity
nu`(Bot) bud#(dia phuong) [Fit of] anger#female; woman#nhu lup Gnarl (on trees)
nu anh hung`Heroine
nu bac si`Woman doctor of medicine, trade-union woman physician
nu ca si`Songstress, female singer
nu cao`(nhac) Soprano
nu chua`Lady paramount
nu cong`housework ;feminine occupations
nu cuoi`smile
nu cuu thuong`First-aid nurse
nu dien vien`Actress
nu du kich`Female guerilla
nu giao vien`Female teacher
nu gioi`emade sex, women
nu hanh`Woman's (feminine) virtues, feminine qualities
nu ho sinh`Mid-wife
nu hoa`Feminize
nu hoang`Queen
nu hoc duong`(cu) School for girl, girl's school
nu kiet`Heroine
nu lang`(cu) Maid, maiden
nu luu`The fair sex, maiden
nu sac`Feminine beauty, beauteousness, pulchritude
nu si`Woman of letters, bluestocking, authoress, poetess
nu sinh`school-girl
nu tac`Ruler of feminine education
nu than`Godess
nu tinh`feminity,womanliness
nu tram`(nhac) Contralto
nu trang`jewel
nu tu`Girl, dauthter
nu tu si`Nun, sister
nu tuong`Woman general
nu van si`(cu) Woman writer
nu vuong`Queen
nu y si`Woman physician
nu y ta`nurse
nua`Kouniak (kinf of araceous plant with edible tuber).#dia phuong) Big python#Neohouzeaua (a kind of bamboo)#half#more, further#longer
nua buoi`Mid-morning; mid-evening
nua chung`Unfinished, incomplete
nua dem`midnight
nua doi`Middle age
nua duong`Half-way
nua khi`(cung noi nua roi) Eventually, in the end, finally
nua la`Let alone
nua loi`Noi nua loi la hieu#o know how to take a hint
nua luong`Half-pay
nua mua`A half-baked
nua roi`nhu nua khi
nua ta`ozen; half a dozen
nua tien`Half-price
nua voi`Lam nua voi#o do (something) by halves
nuc`Hot#Tighten, twist tight#be pervaded with#xem ca nuc
nuc cuoi`Ridiculous, laughter-provoking
nuc danh`nhu nuc tieng
nuc long`Enthusiastic, zealous, with fire
nuc nich`Fat but firm
nuc no`Sob
nuc noi`Hot, sultry
nuc tieng`Very famous
nui`flock#mountain
nui bang`(dia ly) Iceberg
nui lua`volcano
nui non`mountains
nui rung`Mountain and forests, forests
nui song`Land, country
num`to seize; to glab
num vu`teat, tit ; nipple
nung`(dia phuong) nhu nang#ift, raise#(tuc)Feel sexually] aroused#Court fondling from, court pampering from, coddle oneself#Give (lose) ground, become weaker, weaken#nhu nong +Broad flat dryiung basket#to burn; to fire; to bake#to caress
nung benh`Incubate
nung duc`Temper
nung mu`Fester, suppurate
nung na nung ninh`xem nung ninh (lay)
nung nau`to heat
nung ninh`rotund, flabbily fat
nung niu`(dia phuong)#(it dung)Soothe#to coddle oneself
nung nung`xem nung (lay)
nuoc`Turn#water
nuoc bi`Stalemate#ix, straits, cleft stick, pinch, pretty pass
nuoc bong`Lustre (of pearls ...)
nuoc bot`cung noi nuoc dai, nuoc mieng
nuoc canh`Soup
nuoc cham`Sauce
nuoc chanh`Lemon squash, lemonade
nuoc che`Tea
nuoc da`complexion#ice
nuoc dai`Gallop#nhu nuoc bot#nhu nuoc giai
nuoc dai quy`(cu)Amoniac
nuoc doc`(cu)Unwholesome climate, malarian environment
nuoc doi`Calvary.#he calvary of life is full of oddities and severities#ambiguous, equivocal
nuoc dung`Stationary water level#Stock, bouillon, consomme'
nuoc ep`Juice
nuoc giai`Urine
nuoc goi dau`Shampoo
nuoc hang`Brown sugary water
nuoc hoa`perfume; scent
nuoc khoang`Mineral water
nuoc kieu`Amble
nuoc la`Water
nuoc len`High water, high tide
nuoc leo`Sauce
nuoc lo`Brackish water
nuoc loc`Filtered water
nuoc lu`Freshhet, flood
nuoc mam`Fish sauce
nuoc mat`Tear
nuoc ngoai`Foreign country#broad
nuoc oc`Water from boiled shellfish
nuoc oi`Amniotic fluid
nuoc tieu`nhu nuoc giai
nuoc tra`Tea
nuoc uong`rink, water; drinking water
nuoc vang`Ichor (discharged from a wound)
nuoc vo gao`Hog-wash
nuoc voi`Lid eugenia tea#Lime water
nuoc xao`Flavoured meat soup
nuoc xot`Sauce
nuoc xuong`Low water, low tide, ebb
nuoc xuyt`Thin stock, thin bouillon
nuoi`Wait (on one's death-bed) for the return of one's close relative#to nourish; to bring up; to feed; to breed
nuoi bo`Bottle-feed (a baby), bring up on the bottle
nuoi cay`(sinh vat) Grow (bacteria..) in a culture medium
nuoi duong`to bring up; to rear
nuoi nang`to bring up, to foster
nuoi tam`o breed; to raise
nuoi tre`Khoa nuoi tre#uericulture
nuoi trong`Rear (animals) and grow (plants)
nuom`nhu num
nuom nuop`Flock, stream
nuong`Indugle, pamper, spoil#nhu nang#to grill; to bake; to roast#to lean on; to depend on
nuong bong`Depend on (rely on) another person
nuong cay`Depend on (somebody) for help
nuong chieu`to indulge, to spoil
nuong ma`Rice-seedling field
nuong nau`to shelter oneself; to take refuge
nuong nho`Lean on some's help
nuong nuong`Your ladyship
nuong ray`Burnt-over land, milpa, kaingin
nuong tay`Be careful, be light-handed
nuong than`Find shelter
nuong tu`(cu)Young lady, damsel
nuong tua`Lean on, depend on (somebody)
nuot`Glossy and fair#to swallow
nuot chung`o swallow up
nuot gian`to bottle up one's anger
nuot han`Suppress one's hatred, suppress one's resentment
nuot hon`Suppress one's anger
nuot loi`Go back on one ' s word
nuot nhuc`Eat (swallow) the leek
nuot song`cung noi nuot tuoi Pocket by force, appropriate by force swallow
nuot troi`(thong tuc) Pocket without a hitch, swallow
nuot trung`Swallow up
nuot tuoi`nhu nuot song
nup`to take cover; to take shelter
nut`cork; stopper; stoople#knot#to crack; to split; to chap
nut gac`(y hoc) Tampon
nut mat`be too young to (for)
nut nanh`Crack, split
nut ra`o split open
nut ran`Crack, fissure
o`Smeared#cam than. hey#eagle#medium-sized earthen pot#to be indifferent#nest#nhu u#ea#oh; o#to rush; to flow#suburd#betel and areca-nut box. umbrella. square#to belch; to eruct#to flirt;#aunt; auntie (father's sister); young girl#to live;to be#stay;remain
o an`Live (lead) the life of a recluse
o at`to mass; to crowd
o be`to flatter; to pamper
o bi`ball-bearing
o cam`(dien)Socket
o chu`rossword puzzle
o chuot`rat-hole
o cu`Be congined, be in childbirth
o danh`bad reputation
o dau`Put up provisionally at a friend's
o do`(cu) Serve, be a servant
o doi`in life
o dung`nhu o khong
o e`Bable#Be big with child#Fiddling noise#Hoarse, husky#dia phuong) Hulky
o ep`Coerce; be under coercion
o ga`pot-hole
o hay`nhu o hay#why! well!
o ho`Be indifferent#alas!
o hop`motley; heterogenous
o khoa`lock
o khong`cung noi o dung Be idke
o kia`nhu o hay#nhu o kia
o kien`est of ants; ant-hill
o lai`Ramain, stay#extortionate clerkdom, corrupt clerkdom
o li`Not to move, be glued to a place
o liu`Olive
o lo`(dia phuong) nhu o truong
o lon`Piggery, pigsty
o long`Black dragon brown tea (a kind of Chinese tea)
o mai`Salted dry apricot; sugared dry apricot#alted (sugared) dry carambola (tamarind...)
o mat`(cu)Eye socket
o moi`termitary; termitarium
o mua`Earn one's living as a seasonal servant, serve as a causual servant
o muon`Serve (a family) for wages
o nam`Serve (a family) on a long-term basis
o nay`Hallo, hello
o ne`(dia phuong) nhu o khong
o nhiem`to polute
o nhuc`ignoble; ignominious
o o`Deep#Snore#ock-a-doodle-doo#Um, um
o oe`Baby's cry
o rang`Alveolus
o re`nhu gui re
o rieng`settle down to married life
o ro`Bear's breech (cay)
o tac cot`(duoc)Cuttle bone
o tap`Miscellaneous, hodge-podge-like
o thue`Rent a house, live in a rented house
o thuoc`(van chuong, cu)The crow and the magpie
o to`otorcar; automobile
o tran`Have bare back, be half-naked
o tro`live in lodgings; board
o troc`impure, corrupt
o truc`(co hoc) Pillow-block, plummer-block
o truong`Have one's trousers off, have no trousers on
o ue`dirty; impure; filthy
o vay`Continue in one's widowhood
o vuong`Square
oa`Burst out crying#o burst out crying
oa oa`to wail
oa tru`to conceal; to receive; to harbour
oac oac`to croak
oach`Plump#Swell#apper
oai`stateliness; majestry; imposing appenrance#stately; majestic#tired; fatigued
oai am`wkward#rotchety; whimsical
oai danh`power and reputation
oai hung`formidable, awe-inspiring
oai huong`(thuc vat)Lavender
oai linh`impressvely holy
oai nghi`nhu uy nghi
oai nghiem`grave; solemn
oai oai`to scream, to shriek
oai oam`Awkward#rotchety, whimsical
oai phong`with pain
oai quyen`nhu uy quyen
oai ve`stately
oam oap`Lap
oan`Truncated cone of sticky rice#runcated-cone-shaped cake (made of roast glutinous rice flour)#being victim of an injustice#to bend; to sag; to curve#to resent; to feel resentment against
oan cuu`animosity
oan ghet`to feel resentment, to hate
oan gia`Foe, enemy#cu) Retributive calamity
oan gian`resent indignantly
oan han`to resent very deeply
oan hon`Feel resentment against, resent#soul of a victim of an injustice
oan khien`(cu)Being victim of a gross injustice
oan kho`Undeserved misfortune
oan khuat`(cu)Gross injustice
oan khuc`(cu) nhu oan khuat
oan nghiet`potenbially disastrous from one's own doings
oan oai`Writhe, squirm
oan than`Complain, grumble#to complain angrily
oan thu`Feel resentment and hatred against, resent and hate
oan tinh`Being victim of an injustice
oan trach`complain angrilly
oan trai`karmax derived from bad actions
oan tu ti`One-two-three (tro choi tre em)
oan uc`Being victim of a glaring injustice
oan uong`injustice
oang`Loud and powerful (of voice)
oang oac`Croak shrilly
oang oang`xem oang (lay)
oanh`Oriole
oanh kich`to bomb; to strafe
oanh liet`glorious; far-famed
oanh oach`xem oach (lay)
oanh tac`Bomb from the air, drop bombs by plane
oat`(dien)Watt#Be inflected, be bent#puny
oat con`pygmy; imp ; dwarf
oc`Flow out, stream out#brain#screw#shellfish;gasteropod#to vomit; throw up
oc ach`flatulent#nhu oc ach
oc cham biem`ry humour
oc dao`Oasis
oc dau`Soy curd
oc oc`xem oc (lay)
oc sao`Bold and arrogant
oc sen`(dong vat)Snail
oc trau`Clotty substance
oc xa cu`mother of pearl
oe`(khau ngu)Retch#Bend
oe hoe`Be fussy, by finicky
oe oe`Scream, shriek of pain#nhu oa oa
oi`Hey, hello#es#Noisy, uproarious#Retch#amnion#all over; widespread#cam than. hey; call repeatedly#creel#hot and oppressive; sultry#guava#qua oi#tainted (meat); putrid (flesh)#to vomit; to bring up
oi a`sweltering
oi buc`muggy
oi cha`nhu ui cha
oi chao`Alas!
oi dao`Now then!
oi khet`Rancid
oi khoi`smell of smoke
oi mau`o vomit blood
oi nong`ultry
oi nuoc`waterlogged
oi oi`xem oi (lay)
oi op`Weakly
oi thoi`Alas
om`(dia phuong)nhu com Undergroun because of lack of light#(thong tu.c)Too#Make a noise, raise a din. +Cai nhau om len To quarrel uproariously#ill; sick#to embrace; to hug; to take in one's arms#to simmer#to make a noise#very; pitch
om ap`to embrace, to cuddle ; to nurse, to nurture
om cham`xem cham
om chan`to fawn upon, to toady to
om dau`Hold one's head in one's hands#nhu dau om
om dit`(thong tuc)Lick (somebody's) arse
om dom`cary too many things with one
om don`(thong tuc)Badly beaten up#ead beat, exhausted
om nghen`Have morning sickness
om nhom`Thin as a lath
om o`Ailing, sickly#do something in a familiar wat
om om`Hoarse, croaky
om op`to croak
om som`noisy; uproarious
om toi`Noisy, uproarious
om trong`(thong tuc)Be pregnant, be in the family way
om xuong`Danh om xuong#o give a sound beating
om yeu`feeble; thin and weak
on`Accumulate#favour#noisy; uproarious#settled; snooth; without a hitch#to be sickening for; to be fed up#to review; to revise
on a`Noisy; riotous
on ao`Noisy
on ap`(dien)Voltage stabilizer
on con`Little devil, imp
on dich`Epidemic#lague, bubonic plague
on dinh`stable; settled
on do`(cu)nhu nhiet do
on doi`temperate zone
on en`Lumberly#Manneristically soft-spoken
on hoa`equable; even-tempered#moderate; middle-of-the-road
on hue`(dia phuong) xem an hue
on lanh`eel chilly
on luyen`Review (revise) and drill
on minh`Have the shivers
on nghia`(dia phuong) xem an nghia
on on`Incessantly noisy#xem on (lay)
on tap`to review, to swat for one's exams
on thoa`Satisfactory to all, to everyone's liking, satisfactorily composed
on ton`tinh tu. soft, mild, moderate
on vat`Imp, little devil
ong`Glossy, sleek#Swell#bee. con ong#grandfather#pipe; duct
ong a`lissome
ong anh`You#shining
ong ba`grandfather and grandmother
ong ba muoi`(khau ngu) Tiger
ong bap cay`cung noi ong bau
ong bau`Manager
ong bom`Bicycle pump, motorbike pump
ong bung`pot-bellied
ong buom`nhu buom ong
ong cha`Ancestors, forefathers, forbears
ong chan`hin
ong chi`pool
ong chua`Queen bee
ong chuot`Well-groomed, spruce
ong cong`The Lares, Kitchen God
ong cu`Elderly gentleman, old gentleman#ather
ong dan`Conduct, track
ong dia`(dia phuong)The Earth God
ong dieu`pipe
ong dom`nhu ong nhom
ong dot`(dia phuong)Cigarette-holder
ong duc`Drone
ong eo`Mincing#himsical, capricious#mincing
ong gia`(dia phuong) Father-in-law#nhu ong cu
ong khoi`chimney
ong lao`Old gentleman, gentleman advanced in years
ong lon`(cu)Great mandarin#r. Mandarin
ong long`Telescopic
ong mang`Gutter
ong manh`Deceased bachelor.#bong) Mischievious youth
ong mat`honey-bee
ong muot`Glossy and velvety
ong nghe`Earphone; receiver#tethoscope#bumble-bee
ong nho`cung noi ong phong
ong nho giot`Dropper
ong nhom`field-grass; binoculars. binocular
ong oc`Gurgle#nhu ong oc
ong ong`Raucous noise
ong phong`nhu ong nho
ong quyen`(cu) Paper-holding bamboo pipe
ong suc`nhu ong nho
ong tao`The Lares, Kitchen God#nhu tao hoa
ong tay`sleeve (of a garnment)
ong tho`worker
ong thuoc`Ampoule
ong tiem`syringe
ong tien`Bamboo pipe saving bank
ong to`The match-maker#ancestor of a line of descent
ong troi`eaven, the creator
ong tu`Temple guardian
ong tuong`braggard
ong vai`Ancestor #ancestor
ong ve`cung nhu ong vo ve
ong vo ve`wasp
ong voi`Cylindrical lime holder
ong xa`(dua)Hubby
ong xanh`(cu; van chuong)#eaven
ong xoi`Gutter
op`Meager#to goad; to prod#to press together#meager
op ep`Tottering, crumbling, cranky
op oap`Croak
op xop`Very meager
ot`Like child's play#chilli; red pepper; paprika#nape; scruff of the neck
ot dot`Ashamed, shy
ot et`Crind, grate, creak
pa no`(hoi hoa) Panel
pa te`nhu ba te
pan`Breakdown
pao`Pound (khoang 450g)
pe dan`Pedal
pe ni xi lin`Penicillin
pha`Reek, breath#ferry-boat#to reek, to breathe, to erhale#phase, stage#head-light; head-lamp; searchlight#to mix; to mingle; to ad#miscellaneons,#to destroy, to demolish
pha an`to quash a verdict
pha binh`cung noi pha hoang Behave as a killjoy, act, as a wet blanket#to behave as a killjoy
pha bo`Destroy, demolish
pha cach`(cu) Violate the rule of prosody
pha che`Prepare, make up
pha co`Deal out (serve out) a mid-autumn festival cake and fruit
pha cua`Ruin one's fortune
pha dam`to sabotage
pha gia`Ruin one's family#to collapse, to develuate
pha gioi`Unfrock oneself, break one's religious vow
pha giong`Hybrid
pha hai`to min, to ravage
pha he`(cung noi pho he) Genealogy
pha he hoc`(cung noi pho he hoc) Genealogy 
pha hoai`to sabotage, to break up
pha hoang`Break (claim) virgin land#nhu pha binh
pha huy`to destroy, to annul
pha ky luc`o break the record
pha le`Break traditional practices#crystal, glass
pha loang`Dilute
pha ngam`Sabotage, undermine, torpedo
pha ngang`Drop out of school and look for a job, be a drop-out
pha nuoc`Get a rash in an unfamiliar climate
pha phach`to devastate
pha quay`to disturb, to harass
pha roi`to disturb, to harass, to derange
pha san`to fail completely. to go bankrupt
pha sap`Pull down (a builing) ; demolish
pha tan`Break (silence, peace)#nhu pha trinh
pha tap`Mixed, mingled
pha thai`to procure abortion
pha thoi`(thong tuc) nhu pha quay
pha tieng`Mimic someone's voice
pha tran`Upset the enemy combat disposition
pha trinh`to deflower, to deprive of virginity
pha tro`joke; jest
pha tron`Mix, blend, mingle
pha vay`(quan) Break through (the enemy siege)
pha vo`Break through
pha xa`Roast pea-nuts
phac`Like a grave#to sketch, to draft
phac hoa`to sketch, to outline
phac thao`Sketch out, outline
phac thuc`(it dung) Frank, sincere, plain and honest
phac tinh`Calculate approximatively; estimate
phach`detachable head#way, manner
phach lac`(dia phuong)
phach loi`smiffy, haughty
phach tau`(thong tuc) nhu phach loi
phai`right#must, should#to delegate, to send, to detach#faction, group, branch#to fade
phai ba`(bong) Fall victim to somebody's charms
phai biet`mighty
phai bo`mission
phai cach`proper, decent
phai cai`Only
phai chang`right and wrong. reasonable, sensible
phai chi`cung noi phai nhu If
phai dao`conformable to duty
phai dep`fair sex
phai doan`delegation, mission, deputation
phai don`Get (be given) the cane, be whipped
phai dua`(thong tuc) Have taken a leaf from the book of, walk in the shoes of
phai gai`(thong tuc) Be spoony upon a girl
phai gia`At a reasonable price
phai gio`Be born at an inauspicious hour ; die at an inauspicious hour#Faint from a cold#ow naughty of you!
phai khi`At an unlucky moment of
phai lai`have (suffer) a relapse
phai lat`(dia phuong) xem phai nhat
phai le`sencible, rightteous
phai long`be in love with
phai mo`Fade
phai nhat`nhu phai nghia 2
phai phep`Conform to the rule of conduct
phai quay`ight or wrong
phai roi`Quite right, that is it
phai sinh`(ngon ngu) Derivative
phai toi`Get into trouble, suffer for in retribution#hy should
phai trai`Right and wrong
phai va`nhu phai toi
phai vien`correspondent
phai yeu`The weaker sex
pham`coarse, philistine#as, being#dye#to offend, to contravene, to commit
pham an`Be a coarse eater
pham binh`nhu binh pham
pham cach`Personal dignity, human dignity
pham cap`(tu cu) Mandarins' ranks
pham chat`quality
pham de`(tu cu) Write down one's appreciation (of a poem ...)
pham do`(cu) nhu pham nhan
pham gia`dignity
pham ham`(tu cu) Mandarins' grades
pham hanh`behaviour, conduct, dignity
pham huy`(cu) Profane tabooed names
pham le`Introduction, foreword
pham loai`(tu cu) Grade
pham nhan`(it dung) The common people#criminal, culprit
pham pham`Impetuous and truculent
pham phap`In perfect coordination#to break the law#xem phap (lay)
pham phong`Swoon during sexual intercourse; fall sick after sexual intercourse
pham phu`vulgar person, ordinary nan
pham phuc`(tu cu) Mandarins' grade attire
pham quy`(cu) Break examination regulations
pham thuong`show irreverence to superiors
pham trat`(tu cu) Mandarins' ranks
pham tru`category
pham tuc`commonplace, phillistine
pham tuoc`Mandarins' titles, dignity
pham vat`article, product
pham vi`domain, sphere
phan`Faeces, excrements#Lid#hade#Pot for cooked rice#Status, station, rank, place, position#cholk, powder, flour#part, portion, share#plank bed, camp-bed#to betray, to be disloyal to#stools, excrements#centimeter, hundredth#to separate, to share#to order. to judge
phan anh`to reglect, to recount, to tell ingorm
phan bac`(dia ly) Substage#(tu cu) Unhappy lot, misfortune#Night-soil
phan ban`Sub-committee#ection, sub-department
phan bao`(sinh hoc) Cellular division#Command, order
phan bi`Compare enviously
phan biet`dong tu. to discriminate, to distinguish, to discean
phan bo`(sinh hoc) Sub-order#(van chuong) Condition of the weaker sex#Apportion#Distribute, dispose
phan bon`manure, fertilizer
phan bua`cung noi phan vua
phan cach`Seperate
phan cap`o devolve, to various levels
phan cat`(sinh hoc) Segment
phan chan`to feel cheerful, to be in high spirits
phan chat`to analyse
phan chi`Be bitterly disappointed,be angered by disappointment#Subdivision.#sinh hoc) Subgenus
phan chia`to divide
phan chieu`to reflect
phan chim`Guano
phan chuong`Cattle manure
phan chuong trinh`Subprogramme (of computers)
phan cong`to allot, to assign#to counter-attack
phan cuc`Polarize#Sub-department, section
phan cuc ke`(vat ly) Polarimetre
phan dam`(nong nghiep) Nitrogenous fertilizer
phan dan chu`anti-democratic
phan dau`to strive, to contard, to struggle
phan de`antithesis
phan di`(dia ly) Differentiation
phan diem`(cu) Eating-house#(thien van) Equinox
phan dinh`Delimit, fix
phan doan`Judge
phan doi`Section (army unit)#to object, oppose, to be against
phan dong`Most, the greatest, part#to react
phan dot`(sinh hoc) Segmented; segmental
phan giac`(toan hoc) Duong phan giac#isector, bisectrix
phan giai`to conciliate, to mediate. (oh), to analyse
phan gioi`Delimit, demarcate
phan hach`(vat ly) Nuclear fission
phan hang`Classify
phan he`Subsystem
phan hieu`School branch, university branch
phan hoa`Split, differentiate#danh tu. pollen, anther-dust
phan hoa hoc`(nong nghiep) Chemical fertilizer
phan hoc`(y hoc) Coprology
phan hoi`Association branch
phan hon`The spiritual
phan khoi`excited, encouraged
phan kich`nhu phan khich
phan lan`(nong nghiep) Phosphat fertilizer
phan lap`Separate (powers)
phan liet`Split, divide
phan loai`(sinh hoc) Subspecies#to classify, to distribute
phan loai hoc`Taxonomy, systematics
phan lon`Most, the greates part
phan lop`(sinh hoc) Subclass
phan lu`Diverge (deflect) freshets
phan ly`o separate, to divide
phan minh`Definite, clear-cut
phan mo`Grave
phan muc`Subdivision
phan nan`to complain, to carg, to bemoan
phan nao`to some extent, to a certain degree
phan nganh`(sinh hoc) Subphylum
phan nghich`rebellious
phan nhiem`Divide responsibility
phan nhieu`the greatest part, most
phan no`Be indignant#to lose one's temper
phan phat`Flipflap, flapping noise#Share out, distribute#xem phat (lay)
phan phoi`Allot, allocate
phan quyet`decision, sentence
phan rom`Talcum powder
phan sap`Cosmetics, beauty preparations.#thong tuc) make oneself up, make up
phan so`(math) fraction
phan son`Face-powder and lipstick
phan su`(cu) Senior clerk (in administrative service)#duty, obligation
phan tam`Of two minds
phan thuong`prize, recompense
phan thuy`Duong phan thuy#atershed
phan tich`to analyse, to dissect
phan tram`Percentage; per cent
phan tran`Clarigy apologetically, explain apologetically (some matter)#Feather duster
phan tranh`Be in conflict, clash
phan truyen`Order (said of a superior authority)
phan tu`(math) numerator, molecule#Element
phan tu luong`(hoa hoc) Molecular weight
phan u`(nong nghiep) Compost
phan uat`Foam with silent anger, boil over with silent indignation, choke with indignation
phan ung`to react#reaction
phan uu`to condole with (someone)
phan vai`(san khau) Cast (a play)
phan van`[Be] wavering [be] undecided, [be] of two minds
phan viec`One's job, one's responsibility
phan vo co`(nong nghiep) Mineral fertilizer, inorganic fertilizier
phan vua`nhu phan bua
phan vung`Mark off into economic zones; zone
phan xa`to reflect
phan xanh`Green manure
phan xu`Arbitrate
phang`Big jungle knife#Immediate, instant#eat, definite#level, even, flat, plane#to throw stick at
phang lang`calm, quiet, uneventful
phang li`smooth as glass
phang phac`xem phac (lay)
phang phan`Smooth, even
phang phat`to float in the air, to waft#dim, vague
phang phiu`neat and smooth
phang teo`Joker#thong tuc) Done for, kaput
phanh`to dissect, to open
phanh phach`xem phach (lay)
phanh phui`to bare, to expose, to reveal
phanh thay`to quarter#brake. phanh tay hand brake
phao`Like a breath#fire-cracker, craker#float, buoy
phao binh`artillery
phao bong`fireworks
phao cao xa`Anti-aircraft gun, AAgun
phao cau`Parson's nose, pope's nose, rump of cooked fowl
phao coi`Mortar
phao dai`cung noi phao dung Big fire-cracker#fortress, bunker
phao dap`Squib
phao day`Powder-filled paper string
phao dung`nhu phao dai
phao ham`Gunboat
phao hieu`Flare, star shell
phao hoa`Fireworks
phao kich`bombing
phao lenh`Signal gun shot
phao ngon`Rumour
phao phi`Squander
phao sang`Flare, star-shell
phao tep`Small fire-cracker
phao thu`Gunner
phao thuyen`Gunboat
phao tieu`Buoy
phao tin`o spread a rumour
phao xiet`Friction fire-craker
phap`Deeply#France#French
phap bao`Buddhist magic#uddhist devotional article#ffective means (of solving a problem)
phap che`law
phap danh`Religious name (of a Buddhist monk)
phap hoa`Frenchify, gallicize
phap hoc`Legislation
phap lenh`Law, state law
phap li`law principle, principle of law
phap linh`aw, regulations, ordinances
phap luat`danh tu. law
phap ngu`French, the French language
phap nhan`Legal man, legal person
phap phoi`Flutter, wave
phap phong`Be on tenterhooks, be in anxious suspense#Throb, heave
phap quan`(lich su) Ephor.#cu) Magistrate
phap quy`Regulation, rule
phap quyen`Jurisdiction
phap su`Sorcerer, magician#enerable bonze
phap thuat`(cu) Sorcery, witchcraft, magic
phap thuoc`French domination
phap tri`(cu) Rule by law
phat`Buddha#Pat#to distribute, to dispense, to issue, to deliver#to slap, to clap#to punish, to fine, to penalize#to cut down (a tree)#to wave, to agitate
phat Ba`Bodhisattva Kwan Yin
phat am`Pronounce, enunciate
phat ban`(y hoc) Break out in the rash
phat bieu`to express, to formulate
phat binh`Dispatch troops
phat bong`(the thao) Sent (a ball), serve
phat canh`Rent lant
phat chan`(cu) Distribute relief; give alms
phat dai`Buddha's altar
phat dan`Buddha's birthday
phat dat`to prosper, to develop
phat den`(the thao) Penalty
phat dien`Generate electricity, generate power#Go crazy, go mad
phat doan`(cu) Begin
phat dong`Mobilize.#ky thuat) Motive
phat duc`(sinh ly) Develop
phat duong`Pagoda
phat giac`to reveal, to discover, to find out
phat giam`Punish by terms of custody
phat giao`Buddhism
phat goc`Corner [-kick]
phat hanh`to publish, to issue, to emit
phat hien`Discover, excavate
phat hoa`Catch fire, begin to burn, begin to blaze up#egin to fire, open fire
phat hoc`Buddhology
phat huy`Bring into play
phat kien`Discover#iscovery
phat lang`(tu cu) Franc (monetary unit)
phat long`Vex; be vexed
phat luu`(tu cu) nhu phat vang
phat mai`Put up to (for) auction, auction, put on sale (things confiscated ...)
phat minh`to invent, to discover
phat moc`(tu cu) Begin felling timber (to build house)
phat ngon`to speak
phat nguyen`Spring, orginate, rise
phat nhiet`(hoa hoc) Exothermal, exothermic.#vat ly) Calorific
phat phi`Put on excessive weight
phat pho`to float, to wave
phat phoi`nhu phap phoi
phat quang`(vat ly) Luminesce
phat ray`Clear (moutain area ...) of trees for cultivation
phat sang`(sinh vat) Photogenic
phat sinh`Spring, originate
phat song`Dalai-Lama; Grand Lama
phat sot`Have a fever, run a temperature
phat tai`Make a packet, feather one's nest
phat tan`Induce sweating, act as a sudatory substance
phat tang`Hold a mouring-wearing ceremony
phat thanh`to broadcast
phat thanh vien`Announcer
phat thu`Buddha's hand, finger citron
phat tich`Rise up originally
phat tiet`Come out, appear, apparent
phat to`Gautama Buddha
phat trien`Develop, expand
phat tu`Budhist#Punish by terms of imprisonment
phat va`(tu cu) Punish by a fine, fine
phat van`Phuong phap phat van#aieutic method
phat vang`(tu cu) Banish, exile
phat vi canh`Fine (somebody) for a common nuisance
phat xit`fascist. chu nghia phat xit#ascism
phat xuat`Originate, spring
phat y`Vex, be vexed
phau`Cylindrical pot#Spotless, immaculate
phau thuat`Surgery
phau thuat vien`Surgeon
phay`(dia ly) Fault#nlarge with a fraise#Fan gently (flick) off
phay khuan`(sinh vat) Vibrio
phay phay`Buxom (noi ve dan ba)
phe`Comment on#Criticize#Dethrone, depose, discrown#Excessively#fat, obese, pot-bellied#side, camp, part
phe binh`War-invalid#to comment, to criticize
phe bo`to abolish, to nullify
phe bung`Pot-bellied
phe canh`faction, side
phe cau khuan`Pneumococus
phe chuan`to ratify, to confirm
phe dang`party
phe de`Deposed (dethroned, discrowned) king
phe duyet`Approve
phe lap`(tu cu) Depose one king and replace him by another
phe lieu`Waste, scrap
phe nang`(giai phau hoc) Alveolus
phe ne`Corpulent
phe nhan`invalid, disabled person
phe no`Aboliton of slavery
phe phai`factions and parties
phe pham`waste ; substandard product
phe phan`Criticize, review
phe phay`Flap gently#khau ngu) nhu phe
phe phe`xem phe (lay)#xem phe (lay)
phe phon`to overindulge
phe quan`Bronchus (snh bronchia)
phe tat`danh tu. (id) infirmity
phe thai`Waste
phe tich`Ruins
phe truat`to depose
phe vat`refuse, waste material
phe vi`(giai phau hoc) Pneumogastric
phe viem`(tu cu) Pneumonia
phech`Losing freshness, bleached
phen`(khau ngu) Beat#Wattle#alum#time, turn
phen chua`Alum
pheng la`gong
pheng pheng`Gong sound
phenh`Pot-bellied statue#Dumpy, squat#Swell
pheo`Pig's smal intestine#ive off, ooze out#leetingly, quickly over#xtremely (dull, insipid)
phep`rule, custom#magic power. permit, permission, authorization
phep chia`Division
phep cong`Addition
phep cuoi`Civil marriage
phep la`iracle
phep lanh`(ton giao) Benediction
phep mau`Miracle, charisma
phep nghi`Leave, furlough
phep nha`Family's rule of conduct
phep nhan`Multiplication
phep tac`Rule; regulation
phep thong cong`(ton giao) Communion
phep thuat`Sorcery, witchcraft
phep tinh`operation
phep tru`Substraction
phep vua`King's law, king's rule of behaviour
phet`(dia phuong) cung noi dau phet Comma#Spread, daub#pank#(thong tuc) cung noi noi phet#Plump#Spit filthily#oil involimtarily
phet lac`(thong tuc) nhu khoac lac
pheu`(dia phuong) nhu sui#funnel
pheu phao`Sputter weakly
phi`(of horse) to gallop#(Geog) Africa#Bandit#pit. spit at#o something to one's heart's content#Be bloated#Blow, send out, let out, puff out#ut on mush flesh#Wast, squander
phi bang`to defame, to slander
phi bao`Send a dispatch, dispatch
phi cang`airport
phi chi`Satified
phi chinh tri`Apolitical
phi co`plane, airplane, aircraft
phi cong`pilot, aviator, flying-man
phi cong vu tru`Astronaut, cosmonaut astronaut
phi cuoi`Burst out laughing
phi da`To one's heart's content
phi doi`squadron, flight
phi giao hoi`Laic
phi hanh doan`crew
phi hanh vu tru`Cosmonautics, astronautics
phi kiem`Throwing sword
phi lao`Casuarina-tree
phi lo`Loi phi lo#oreword
phi long`nhu phi da
phi ly`absurd,  irrational
phi mau dich`Non-merchant
phi nga`(triet hoc) Non-ego
phi nghia`Unjust, unrightteous, ill-gotten
phi nguyen`Fulfil one's wishes, realize one's aspirations
phi nhieu`rich, fat, fertile
phi nho`Spit at, spit up, spit upon
phi non`Fat, corpulent
phi pha`nhu phi pheo
phi pham`(it dung) Extraordinary, superhuman, unusual#to waste, to squander exceptional
phi phao`Planes and mortars
phi phap`Unlawful, illegal
phi phi`xem phi (lay)#xem phi (lay)
phi pho`Pant, puff and blow
phi phong`(tu cu, van chuong) Shabby gentility
phi quan su`Demilitarized
phi quan su hoa`Demilitarize
phi san xuat`Non-production
phi suc`To the capability of one's strength
phi tan`Royal concubines
phi thoi gian`(triet hoc) Non-temporel
phi thuc dan hoa`Decolonize
phi thuc tai`Unreal
phi thuong`extraordinary, abnomal
phi ton`charge, cost, expense. khoi tra phi ton free of charge
phi trong luong`Weightless
phi truong`cung noi san bay
phi vo san`Non-proletarian
phi vo san hoa`Deproletarize
phia`(khau ngu) nhu bia#(tu cu) Thai canton headman#side, way, direction
phia tao`(tu cu) Thai ruling class
phia truoc`ront, in front
phich`Thermos flask, vacuum flask#ibrary card#dien) Plug#thud
phich nuoc`ilter
phiem`Idle, unrealistic, aimless#ngon ngu) Indefinite
phiem ai`Philanthropic
phiem chi`Refer in a general way to
phiem dinh`(vat ly) Indifferent, neutral
phiem du`to ramble
phiem luan`dong tu. to expatiate
phiem than`antheistic
phien`danh tu. opium#slab. (of stone, etc...)#to annoy, to bother, to disturb#turn
phien am`to transcribe phonetically
phien ban`Reproduction
phien che`(quan ddo^.i) Organize; arrange
phien chua`(su hoc) Vassal prince
phien dich`to translate
phien dien`Unilateral, one-sided
phien dong`(tu cu) Instigate to violence, stir to violence
phien ha`danh tu. trouble
phien hieu`(quan cu) Number (of a unit)
phien loan`to stir up revolt
phien long`to worry
phien luy`Inconvenience, trouble
phien muon`sad, sorrowful
phien nao`Have a broken heart, be very sad, be affected
phien nhieu`to importune
phien phien`Cursory
phien phuc`complicated, compound
phien quan`Insurgent
phien quoc`(su hoc) Vassal state
phien thach`(dia ly) Schist
phien than`(su hoc) Vassal
phien thuoc`(su hoc) Vassal state
phien toai`Troublesome
phien tran`(su hoc) Border territory
phiet duyet`(tu cu) Great family
phieu`ballok, voting paper
phieu bat`Wander, drift
phieu dieu`(van chuong) Float (in the dreamland ...)
phieu lang`(tu cu) Drift about
phieu luu`to wander
phieu xuat`ally-out
phim`film, picture#fret, digital, key
phim loan`(tu cu) (nghia bong) Music
phin`Batiste#offee filter, coffee percolator
phinh`Blandish; coax#Bloated, oedematous#Plump#Swell
phinh bung`Have a belly swollen (with food ...)
phinh gat`o cheat, to deceive, to dupe
phinh mui`Feel flattered
phinh ninh`Toady (to somebody)
phinh phinh`Strum#xem phinh (lay)#xem phinh (lay)
phinh pho`Coax
phiu`Long (face)
pho`(vat ly) Spectrum#et to (music)#Haggard#Noodle soup#Pho is the most popular food among the population. Pho is mostly commonly eaten for breakfast, although many other people would have it for their lunch or dinner. Anyone feeling hungry in the small hours of the morning can also enjoy a bowl of hot and spicy Pho to fill their empty stomach. Pho also needs its special taste and smell. The grated rice paper is made of the best variety of fragrant rice called Gao Te. The soup for Pho Bo (Pho with beef) is made by stewing the bones of cows and pigs for a long time in a large pot. Pieces of fillet mignon together with several slices of ginger are reserved for a bowl of Pho Bo Tai (rare fillet). Slices of well done meat are however offered to those less keen on eating rare fillets. Meanwhile soup for Pho Ga (Pho with chicken meat) is made by stewing together chicken and pig bones. White chicken meat served with Pho Ga is boneless and cut into thin slices You could regard Pho Bo and Pho Ga as Vietnam's special soup. It has the added advantage of being convenient to prepare and healthy to eat#Set; unit#Show off#Snowy#pho pho (lay)#deputy#dong tu. to escort, to assist#street, house, apartment
pho ban`opy, duplicate
pho bang`(tu cu) Junior doctor
pho bay`Display, exhibit, show
pho bien`to diffuse, to spread, to disseminate
pho cap`Generalize, universalize, make widesread; make compulsory to everyone
pho dien`Express
pho do`Perform universal salvation
pho he`Genealogy
pho he hoc`Genealogy
pho hoi`(tu cu) Attend a meeting
pho ma`prince consort
pho mac`Entrust completely, give free hand to deal with
pho mat`cheese#nhu pho mat
pho ngu`(ngon ngu) Adverbial locution
pho pho`xem pho (lay)
pho phong`Deputy chief of bureau
pho phuong`Street and district#treet
pho quat`(it dung) Spectrometer
pho su`(su hoc) Assitant envoy#eputy resident (under French domination)
pho ta`Follow and aid, act as an aid
pho tai`Underdone beef noodle soup
pho thac`to trust,to entrust, to confide
pho thong`common, general universal
pho thong dau phieu`Universal suffrage
pho thuong han`Paratyphoid
pho tien si`Master (of sciences ...)
pho truong`to display, to show off
pho tu`adverb
pho tuong`tatude
pho van phong`Deputy chief of the scretariat
pho vuong`Viceroy
pho xa`Streets
phoc`In one bound#Strong, forceful
phoi`Come out#Embryo#ky thuat) Rough draft#Leave quickly (a place)#Shavings#lung#to dry in the sun
phoi ao`(the thao, thong tuc) Defeated
phoi bay`to expose
phoi bo`(thong tuc) Wear one's heart upon one's sleeve
phoi canh`Perspective
phoi hop`co-ordinate, combine
phoi nang`Put (hang) out to dry in the sun#xpose to the sun; play in the sun (of children)
phoi nhac`Instrument
phoi pha`to wilt, to wither, to fade
phoi phoi`slightly excited, softly stimulated
phoi phong`nhu phoi (noi khai quat)
phoi sinh hoc`Embrology
phoi thai`embryo
phoi thay`Leave one's mortal remains somewhere
phoi tri`(it dung) Arrange
phom`From (for shoe-making ...)
phom pham`nhu nhom nhoam
phom phop`Buxom, plump (noi ve dan ba)
phon hoa`Noisy and gaudy
phon phot`xem phot (lay)
phon thinh`Thriving
phon vinh`Prosperous
phong`(of king) to confer, to bestow#Clay statue of giant guard; toy earthen statue.#thong tuc) Steal a march on somebody and get what is his due, steal someone's thunder#Scenery, scene, back-cloth (in a theatre)#ackground (of a painting)#burnt, scalded#to copy, to imitate#room, chamber, hall#to prevent, to ward off, to avert#to bloat, to swell#to throw, to launch, to let out
phong an`dining-room
phong ba`Vicissitudes#it dung) Storm of anger
phong bao`Make a gift of money wrapped in a parcel (to children on New Year's day#ip, give a tip
phong be`(it dung) Blockade
phong benh`prophylactic, preventive
phong bi`envelope#to take precautions against
phong but`Write on impluse
phong cach`Gaif, carriage#tyle, method
phong cach hoc`Stylistics
phong cam`(am nhac) Accordion
phong canh`lanscape, scenery,sight
phong chung`About, approximately
phong dai`Enlarge#agnify, exaggerate
phong dang`dissolute, debauched
phong dao`folk-song
phong dia`(tu cu) Fief, feoff
phong dich`Make a rough translation, make a free translation#preventive of exidemy
phong dien`electric discharge
phong do`(tu cu) Manners#nhu phong chung
phong doan`to guess, to conjecture
phong doi`waitting-room
phong giu`Prevent, guard against
phong han`Drought prevention#Indisposition [due to cold, to bad weather ...]
phong ho`Provide against all eventualities; keep at hand for eventual use#Rung phong ho#rotective forests
phong hoa`(tu cu) Customs and morals#dia ly) Weather#Fire prevention#Set fire to
phong ke`Anemometer
phong khach`Sitting-room
phong kham`nhu phong kham benh
phong khi`In anticipation of, in case of, against
phong khoang`Broad-minded, liberal [-minded]
phong khong`air defense, acwal defense
phong khue`nhu khue phong
phong kien`feudal
phong lan`(bot) orchid
phong lang`Loose, dissipated, dissolute
phong luu`(tu cu) Refined-mannered#omfortably off
phong mach`(dia phuong) Surgery (of a physician)
phong moi`(thuc vat) Anemophilous
phong ngu`Bedroom#to defend
phong ngua`to prevent
phong nguyet`(tu cu) Pleasure of nature
phong nha`elegant, fine
phong nhi`French Second Bereau, French intelligence service
phong oc`(tu cu) House, dwelling
phong phanh`Thinly and inadequately (dressed)
phong phao`(tu cu) May bay phong phao# bomber#Put[ting] on flesh
phong phu`rich, abudent, copious
phong quang`(tu cu) Beautiful-looking, endowed with beautiful landscapes
phong sinh`Set free (animals caught)#eave uncared for, neglect
phong sinh hoc`Bionics
phong su`Reportage
phong suong`Wind and dew; hardships of life
phong tac`to adapt
phong tay`Recklessly
phong tay tren`nhu phong
phong thai`(tu cu) Manners and attidutde
phong than`Preserve oneself; self-preservative
phong thanh`Broadcast by a loudspeaker#By hearsay, rumour has it
phong thap`Rheumatism
phong the`(tu cu) nhu buong the
phong thi nghiem`laboratory
phong thich`to liberate, to free, to discharge
phong tho`Climate
phong thu`Defend
phong thuong mai`Chamber of commerce
phong thuy`(tu cu) Geomancy
phong tinh`(sinh vat) Ejaculate#Amorous, erotic#Calculate roughly, estimate
phong toa`to blockade
phong tra`Tea-room, tea-shop
phong tran`Wind and dust; dust and heat of life, turmoil of life.
phong trao`movement
phong tu`(tu cu) Figure, carriage, bearing
phong tuc`Custom
phong tung`Loose, on the loose (thong tuc), wild, running wild
phong tuyen`Defence perimeter, defence line
phong ue`to defecate
phong van`(tu cu) Get wind (of something)#(tu cu) Study#Elegant and refined#Wind and clouds; piece of luck, favorable opportunity#to interiew
phong ve`Defend, protect
phong vi`Charm, flavour
phong vien`reporter, correspondent
phong vu bieu`(tu cu) Barometer
phong xa`radio-active#to foresee, to anticipate
phop`Spotlessly, immaculately
phop phap`Plump, stout
phot`Felt#ale, light#thong tuc) Ignore, turn a deaf ear to, turn a blind eye to#dia phuong) Graze, scrape lightly in passing; touch lightly#Spurt, spirt, spirt, spout#Swift
phu`Swell like with oedema, be oedematous, be puffed with oedema#edema#pell, charm#uff#phu phu (lay, y lien tiep)#tu cu) nhu pho#coarse, violent#coolie#dissectation in rythmic prose#ndow#to aid; to help; to assist#assitant; auxiliary#to cover; to overlay#palace; residence
phu am`consonant
phu bac`to betray
phu bam`Innate, inborn,
phu ban`Supplement
phu boc vac`(tu cu) Porter
phu can`surrounding, adjacent
phu cap`allowance
phu chanh`Regent
phu chinh`(tu cu) Revise, correct
phu chu`Annotate#Exorcise with incantations and a charm
phu cuong`(tu cu) Prosperous and poweful
phu dao`Give extra-class help
phu dau`Act as a bridesmaid to, be a bridesmaid#preventive, premonitory
phu de`Palace (of princes)
phu dich`ow-comtant service
phu dieu`Relief, relievo; embossment
phu dinh`(it dung) Insert#negative
phu doan`(tu cu) Governer of the province where the capital was located
phu dong`Supernumerary; coccasional
phu du`(tu cu) Snoothe, placate#ephemera#to ramble; to stroll (about)
phu dung`Cotton-rose hibiscus.#cu; van chuong) Fair, fair maid, fair lady
phu gia`(ky thuat) Additive.#duoc hoc) Adjuvant#(tu cu) Rich (wealthy) family
phu giang`Assitant-lecturer
phu giao`Assitant (to a university professor)
phu hao`(tu cu) Local influential rich man
phu he`patenal line of descent
phu hieu`Badge
phu ho`support
phu hoa`Chime in#Gaudy, show, pompous
phu hoang`King-father
phu hop`to agree; to tally; to accord
phu huynh`father and elder brother
phu ke`(vat ly) Areometer
phu khoa`gynaecology
phu khuyet`Complementary
phu lai`river's mate
phu lao`Elder, elderly person, elderly people
phu luc`(tu cu) Rhymed prose#Help, assist#appendix; adendum
phu mau`(tu cu) Parents
phu mo`miner
phu nghia`Ungrateful, thankless; unfaithful
phu nhan`(tu cu) Woman#mistress#to deny; to negate
phu nong`rich farmer
phu nu`woman
phu on`Be ungrateful (to somebody for something)
phu ong`(tu cu) Rich man
phu pham`By-product
phu phang`ruthless, harsh
phu phen`Coolies, corvee-bound labourers
phu phep`magic, incantation
phu phi`Additional fee, supplementary fee
phu phiem`uncertain; unpractical
phu phu`(tu cu) Husband and wife, man and wife#xem phu (lay)
phu phuc`(tu cu) Kowtow very low
phu quan`(tu cu) My lord, my husband
phu qui`rich and noble
phu quy`Wealth and high-placed
phu quyen`Paternal authority
phu quyet`to veto; to vote against
phu re`Act as a best man, be a best man to#bestman
phu sa`alluvium
phu sinh`cung noi phu the
phu ta`(tu cu) Support and assit#assistant, aid
phu tai`(dien) Additional charge
phu tang`Innards
phu tham`Assessor, juror
phu than`father, dad
phu the`husband and wife#nhu phu sinh
phu thinh`Take sides with (support) the influential people
phu thu`Additionally levied
phu thua`(tu cu) Chief of the district where the capital was located
phu thung`(y hoc) Oedema
phu thuoc`Depend[ent]
phu thuong`rich merchant#(med) beriberi
phu thuy`sorcerer; magician
phu tinh`Be unfaithful, be love-lorn
phu to`(ngon ngu) Affix
phu trach`to undertake; to be in charge of
phu tram`(tu cu) Postman#Full of ups and downs, full of vicissitudes
phu tri`(tu cu) Assist and preserve
phu tro`(it dung) nhu phu ho#Auxiliary
phu truong`supplement
phu tu`(ngon ngu) Adjunct#(tu cu) Father and son#thuc vat, duoc hoc) Aconite#(tu cu) Master, teacher
phu tung`spare parts ; accessories
phu uoc`Break an agreement, not to live up to a pledge
phu van`Agitaion and propaganda among women#Drifting cloud.#nghia bong) Transient thing
phu viet`(su hoc) Axe and big hammer; corporeal punishment implement
phu voi`(y hoc) Elephantiasis
phu xe`(tu cu) Rickshaw driver
phua`(thong tuc) Senselessly, indiscriminately
phuc`Very (fragrant), very (flavoured), very (sweet-smelling)#Phung phuc (lay, y tang)#happiness; good fortune#to admire ; to esteem
phuc am`Blessing handed down by ancestors#Reply, answer (a letter)
phuc an`(luat, tu cu) Review a sentence
phuc binh`Ambush, troops lying in wait
phuc cam`Complex
phuc chat`Complex substances
phuc che`Restore (a painting ...)
phuc chuc`Reinstate, restore
phuc co`Restore what is old
phuc dap`Reply, answer
phuc dich`to serve; to attend to
phuc duc`blessing
phuc duoc`(tu cu) Take medicines
phuc hau`Kind-hearted, gentle and upright
phuc he`Complex
phuc hoat`Rectivate
phuc hoi`Restore
phuc hung`Rehabilitate, restore to former prosperity
phuc khao`(tu cu) Check examination papers
phuc kich`to ambush; to lie in ambush
phuc lan`Be transported with admiration, take one's hat off (to somebody)
phuc lanh`Blessing, benediciton
phuc loc`Happiness and wealth
phuc loi`Welfare
phuc mac`(giai phau) Peritonaeum
phuc menh`(tu cu) Report on execution of orders
phuc nguyen`Restore
phuc phan`Share of happiness one was blessed with
phuc phich`Big and fat, lumpish
phuc quoc`(tu cu) Recover one's country independence
phuc sinh`to revire; to resuscitate
phuc suc`(tu cu) Raiment and adornments
phuc tap`complicated; compound
phuc tap hoa`Complicate
phuc tham`Reconsider cases tried by lower court
phuc thien`Listen to reason
phuc thu`Revenge, avenge
phuc thuoc`(tu cu) Take medicine
phuc toi`(tu cu) Accept punishment, give oneself up
phuc trang`Costume (of actors)#Revigorate
phuc trinh`to report
phuc tung`Comply with, submit oneself to, listen to
phuc vien`to ddemobilize troops
phuc vu`Serve, attend to
phui`Flick off
phui on`Disregard the favour (done by somebody)
phun`to eject;to belch; to vomit; to gush; to erupt#xem mua phun
phun phut`xem phut (lay)
phun trao`(dia ly) Eruptive
phun xuat`(tu cu) nhu phun trao
phung`(tu cu) Bring offerings to a deceased person#Swell, bloat#phoenix#to obey; to serve
phung chi`Comply with a royal ordinance
phung du`Allegory
phung duong`to support maintain (one's parents)
phung hoang`nhu phuong hoang
phung menh`Comply with orders from above
phung pha`Spend extravagantly, squander, throw (money) about
phung phi`to waste ; to squander
phung phinh`Chubby
phung phiu`Want to be humoured, coddle oneself
phung phuc`xem phuc (lay)
phung phung`Flame, glow
phung su`dong tu. to serve; to attend
phung tho`Worship, give respectful cult to
phung vieng`(tu cu) nhu phung
phuoc`(dia phuong) nhu phuc
phuon`Buddhist pennon#Swell, distend
phuong`Manger, feeding-trough#group; giuld; ang#male phoenix#way; direction#way; means; method
phuong an`Project
phuong cach`Ways and means
phuong cham`line, guideline
phuong chi`All the more
phuong danh`(tu cu) Good name, good reputation
phuong dien`aspect; bearing
phuong dong`The Orient
phuong hai`Harm, prejudice
phuong hoang`Male phoenix and female phoenix#hoenix
phuong hoi`Handicrafts guild
phuong huong`Direction ; line
phuong ke`Means
phuong ngon`Local saying#ialect
phuong ngu`Dialect
phuong phap`method;system; experient
phuong phi`Buxom (noi ve dan ba); portly (noi ve nguoi gia)
phuong sach`Method, way
phuong tay`The West, the Occident
phuong thuc`procedure
phuong thuoc`prescription, remedy
phuong tien`means
phuong trinh`(toan hoc) equation
phuong truong`Be of age#Cell (of a bonze)
phuong vi`Azimuth
phuong vien`(tu cu) Perfect, exellent
phuou`Invent, fabricate
phut`Eject, gush, spout, jet#trongly and fast#Snap, crack#minute; moment#nhu phat
phut dau`In next to no time, all of a sudden
phut giay`(it dung) nhu giay phut
phuy`Barrel, drum
pi`(toan) Pi
pin`cell; battery
po`Shot
qua`crow#fruit#gift; present#last#by#to pass away; to be gone#to exceed#very;excessive
qua ban`More than [a] half
qua bang`Than qua bang#void coal
qua bao`Retribution, karma
qua bo`(kieu cach) Bend one's steps
qua cai`(nghia bong) Termagant, vixen, shrew
qua cam`resolute; determined; audacious
qua can`weight
qua canh`Transit
qua cap`gifts, presents
qua cat`kidney
qua cau`(nghia bong) Experiences, go through
qua chen`Having a drop too much
qua chung`Excessively, extremely
qua chuyen`For form's sake, perfunctorily
qua co`depart; deceased
qua da`Beyond measure; too far
qua dam`fist ; blow ; knob
qua dang`Excessive, unreasonable
qua dat`globe, earth. earth
qua do`excessive; immorderate; exorbitant
qua doi`Beyond measure, excessively#to pass away
qua duong`Khach qua duong#asser-by
qua giang`(xay dung) Transversal beam#Get a lift, hitch-hike (My)
qua han`In excess of the time limit, overdue
qua hoc`(thuc) Carpology
qua khich`Extremist
qua kho`Oversize[d]
qua khoang`White-collared crow
qua khu`the past; past
qua la`Truly, really
qua lac`Pendulum
qua lai`Come and go#eciprocal, mutual
qua lam`Too much
qua lan`(tu cu) For mere form's sake
qua loa`summarily
qua loc`filterable
qua loi`Excessive, superlative
qua lua`Past the marriageable age
qua lua lo thi`nhu qua lua
qua lua than`Charcoal
qua mat`Ignore (somebody) (when doing something)
qua mau`(tu cu) Spear and pike
qua muc`Excessive, beyond measure, more than is reasonable
qua ngan`Be broken-hearted; feel very deeply
qua ngay`to kill the time
qua nhiet`(ky thuat) Overheated
qua nien`(tu cu) Past mature age
qua qua`Croak
qua quan`(tu cu) Pass the frontier, transit
qua quat`Exaggerated, excessive
qua quit`perfunetorily
qua quyet`to aver; to assert
qua sang`breakfast
qua ta`Dumb-bell
qua tai`Overloaded
qua tang`flugrant#present
qua that`Nhu qua thuc
qua the`Extremely, too#Truly [so], really [so]
qua thuc`Fruits, gains (of a struggle)
qua tim`Heart#eart-shaped pendant
qua tinh`nhu qua thuc
qua trinh`process
qua troi`(thong tuc) Mighty
qua tron`Excessively, immoderate
qua tua`Tassel
qua u`Excessively, extremely
qua vang`(tu cu) [The] past
qua vay`Truly [so], really [so]
qua xa`(thong tuc) Excessvie, exaggerated
quac`(khau ngu) Hang#e at loggerheads with#Argue (speak, cry ...) loud-mouthedly#Quack; crackle#to glower; to scowl#dazzingly
quac quac`xem quac (lay)
quac thuoc`hale and hearty
quach`Sarcophagus, outer coffin#n order To have done with it#xem do quach
quai`(dia phuong) Spread#Freak, monster#reak, freakish#ischievous#[Not] at all#ow strange, how unusual, how odd#Stretch out (one's arm)#handle#thong tuc) Fetch#it,beat
quai ac`Diabolic
quai bi`Mumps, parotitis
quai cheo`Oar-strap
quai dan`Fantastic
quai di`strange; monstrous ; pecular
quai go`Odd, strange, unusual
quai ham`jaw
quai la`Very strange, very od#ow strange
quai mom`Drawl loud-mouthedly
quai quy`nhu quy quai
quai thai`Monster, monstrosity
quai vat`monster
quai xanh`Xuong quai xanh#lavicle
quam`curved; hooked#hooked
quam quam`Frowning, scowling#Threatening (of look, eyes ...)
quan`Lie in state (of a corpse)#army#be muddle-headed#canal#to mind; to flinch from#to manage; to cope with#crisp; curly#district#kiosk#Inn;restaurant; store; house#small ball; tenis ball. pants; trousers#to tire out; to exhaust#time; unit; round#to feel a writhing pain#to bend; to curve#to wind; to twine#writhe in pain
quan ao`Clothing, clothes#The land of Vietnam is not large, but it incorporates over 50 ethnic groups. Except for the Kinh or Viet people living throughout the country's plains and occupying the majority, others find their place on the hilly and mountainous areas and are preserving their very own cultures and dressing patterns. A costume contest for all ethnicities in Vietnam, if organised, would for sure be very much interesting.What excites people most could be the both primitive and modern costumes of some groups like the Gia Rai. Women of this group wear nothing but a small skirt. Men would take just a loin-cloth to go on any occasion. Certainly, this is much more sexy than any modern fashions in the West! On the other hand, many others are dressing quite complicatedly. The H'Mong girls for instance would wear a shirt, undergarments, leggings and put on a coiled scarf on their head. Their skirts are usually in cone shape with lots of folds that enhance their gentleness. And it is not less exciting to watch them dance, making the folds wide open. The dressing pattern of each ethnic group reflects their culture, history and conceptions. It also shows their life style and working conditions as well. Also, each subgroup also has its distinction from the rest of the same minority. Take the Tay, Thai, Muong, Dao for example. The traditional Tay's costume for girls is a kerchief tied in a triangle on the forehead, simple indigo dress, belt and silver bracelets and chains. A Muong girl usually wears a medium length skirt, short white shirt and a pair of silver earrings The Thai girls are different. They would wear a colourful scarf, short jacket with silver buttons in two lines and a tight black skirt. The silver buttons and shining decorations look like budding bauhinia blossoms. People of the subgroups in the Dao minority share many similarities while at the same time are a little bit distinct from each other. Girls in the Dao Do (Red Dao) keep their hair long and fold them around their heads covered with a red cloth. They wear indigo dress embroiled with decorations in red. It is understandable that these people wear what suit their way of living and the climate they are in. But at the same time, they also know how to produce cloths, embroideries etc. to make their very own dress. One of the speciality they produce is brocade which has become quite famous and made a worthy export product. Nowadays, their traditional dresses have changed to some extend due to cultural interactions with other minorities and the Viet majority. This trend has been shown most obviously in those groups living near the plains where the Viet people are present. The culture of the Viet which forms the majority of their population greatly influences other minorities' cultures. Theoretically, this is a normal phenomena. In the last 10 years, thanks to the renovation process in the country, the pace of cultural, economic interactions among all ethnic groups have been increasing considerably. The process of rapid urbanisation can be found now even in hilly areas. As such, traditional and ethnic cultural activities experience deep changes both for the better and the worse. In some regions, it is now a little difficult to find a youth wearing his/her traditional costume. Although the middle-aged are still keeping with traditions like those in Thanh Hoa or Hoa Binh, it seems many of them have been 'Vietnamised'. The farther they stay from the plains, the more they could keep their dressing, patterns and traditions. It is something worth thinking of when there is a clash between traditional characteristics and a modern life style. Many among them have shifted from skirts and loin-cloths to jeans and plants plus a Western style shirt though the things they are wearing are local made and not quite in vogue The new way of dressing has been introduced to these remote areas by local civil workers who have had chances to go down to the country's urban areas or by teachers sent from such places. In many places, traditional dress is still overwhelming modern new one. With increasing awareness, ethnic people are trying to preserve their dressing patterns in a modern society, combining them to make new designs. This proves to be a good trend worth studying. Modernity does not always coincides with beauty. Fashion development should incorporate both cultural traditions and modern life For these ethnic people, there would be no traditional festivals held if their traditional dresses were dropped out. There would be no more cloth ball contests of the Thai if these people wear fashion wears. Many Vietnamese as well as foreign tourists have found themselves infatuated by the ruou can (wine pot to be drunk together) and the Thai girls' dance in their on-stilts houses. The guests would fly with the dance rhythms. And that is what is attracting tourists to Mai Chau (Hoa Binh province)
quan bach`Hard up#to be hand up
quan bao`Army intelligence, even, equal
quan bi`armament
quan binh`in equlibrium; even; equal
quan bo`Jeans
quan but`Penholder
quan buu`Army post-office
quan ca`Choir leader#march
quan cang`military port
quan canh`military police
quan cap`(su hoc) Distribute (fields) per capita of population
quan che`Military regulations#Put under surveillance
quan chi`Not to mind
quan chinh`politico-military
quan chu`monarchic
quan chua`princess
quan chung`Service#masses; the masses
quan co`(tu cu) Sergeant-major#Military secret#Pawn, chess-man
quan coc`Breeches, underpants#horts
quan com`Inn
quan cong`Duke#military feat; military achievement
quan cu`(tu cu) Live in groups
quan cut`(dia phuong) nhu quan dui
quan dao`(tu cu) Chief of province (in the Western Plateaux)#archipelago
quan dich`enemy#military affair; military; service
quan diem`point of view ; sentiment; angle
quan dien`(su hoc) Distribute fields per capita of population
quan doan`army corps
quan doc`manager
quan doi`army, armed forces
quan dong xuan`Peg-top pants
quan dui`Breeches, under pants (My)
quan dung`For military use
quan gia`butter, housekeeper
quan giao`Educator-warden (in re-education camps)
quan gioi`Military weapon
quan ham`Warship#army rank
quan hat`(tu cu) Local
quan he`(thuc vat) Formation#to affect; to concern; to correlate
quan hieu`military badge
quan hon`Goup marriage
quan hong`(tu cu) Women
quan hop`(sinh hoc) Association
quan huan`Army politico-military training
quan huyen`(cu, van chuong) Flute pipe and guitar chords; musical instruments.#Districts and precints (in general)
quan khi`Military materials, weapons
quan khu`military zone
quan ky`ilitary flag
quan lenh`military orders
quan linh`soldiers, troops
quan luat`martial law
quan luc`armed forces
quan luong`Military provisions
quan ly`o manage
quan ma`(tu cu) Army and horses, troops
quan ngai`to flinch from, to shrink form
quan ngu`(ngon ngu) Locution#Army ranks, army ranks and files
quan nhac`Military music, military
quan nhan`military uniform
quan nhu`Military supplies
quan niem`idea; conception
quan phan`Divide evenly, share out
quan phap`army law
quan phi`Army expenditures
quan phiet`militarist
quan phuc`Mititary uniform
quan quai`to wirthe; to squirm
quan quan`(tu cu) Privates and officers; the Army#champion#military administration#xem quan (lay)
quan quanh`Muddled, with no clear plan
quan queo`Tortuous#nhu quan queo#nhu quan queo#tortous, twisted
quan quit`o hang on to
quan quyen`Sovereignty
quan quyt`nhu quan
quan ruou`Pub
quan sat`observe
quan si`soldiers; warriors, men
quan so`effectives; strength
quan su`military affairs#strategist
quan su hoa`Militarize
quan tai`coffin
quan tay`European-style trousers
quan than`[Duty towards] the king and one's parents#[Relation between] the King and courties#courtess; court officials
quan the`(sinh hoc) Population#(tu cu) Tower above others, be eminent
quan thong`Grasp from beginning to end, understand thoroughly
quan thu`Enemy
quan thuc`to put under house arest
quan tinh`inertia
quan trang`Military equipment
quan tri`Become mudle-hearded#become muddle-headed#to administer
quan triet`Grasp thoroughly
quan tro`Inn; hotel
quan trong`important, chief; grave
quan truong`district chief
quan tu`gentleman#to collect; to group
quan tuong`Mahout
quan uy`District party committee(communist)#The Army Party Committee(communist)
quan vot`tennis
quan vu`Military affairs
quan vuong`King#prince
quan xa`(quan ddo^.i) The Train#(sinh hoc) Society
quan xuyen`to penetrate thoroughly
quan y`army medical corps
quan y si`Army doctor
quan y vien`Military hospital
quang`Nhay quang#ambol, caper#dazzled; blinded#halo; aureole; aureola#hanger#clear#mosquito larva#to throw; to cast; to hurl#ore#section#to hurry up#to put on; to throw on#nonsensical; absund#ndiscriminate#to throw away
quang ba`Spread; broadcast
quang canh`Extensive farming#sight, scene
quang cao`to advertise; to publicize
quang dai`large
quang dang`well-exposed and spacious; clear
quang ga`(med) nyctalopic
quang giao`(tu cu) Have a wide cricle of acquaintances, have a wide acquantance
quang han`Cung quang han#he moon's palace; the moon
quang hoc`optics
quang minh`open
quang mo`Be carried away
quang pho`(ph) spectrum
quang quac`xem quac (lay)
quang quang`Hasty, hurried
quang truong`square
quang tuyen`ray
quang vinh`glorious
quang xien`utterly nonsensical
quanh`(it dung) Desert#round#roundabout#to be firm; thick#to turn
quanh co`meandering; full of turns tortuous
quanh hiu`deserted; forlorn
quanh quan`to hang about#devious
quanh quat`about here, round about
quanh que`desert
quanh vang`Deserted, desolate
quao`to scratch
quap`to bend down; to curve down#to seize; to grasp
quap rau`Hen-pecked
quat`fan#to fan#to flail against the ground#to dip up, to disinter#to lash; to whip#kumquat; mandarin#to shout; to storm#to shrived up#to turn
quat ban`Table fan
quat cuong`indomitable; undauntable
quat dien`Electric fan
quat hom`Winnover
quat hong bi`wampee
quat keo`Punkah
quat khoi`to rise up; to rebel
quat lac`Shout, storm
quat lua`(dia phuong) nhu quat hom
quat mang`storm at
quat may`(khau ngu) Electric fan
quat mo`Areca spathe fan
quat nan`Bamboo tape fan
quat nga`Hurl down
quat queo`Shrivel up#devious; dishonest; tortuous#sickly
quau quau`(dia phuong) nhu cau cau
quay`(dia phuong) Turn, return#Waggle violently, wriggle violently (one's tail) (noi ve ca)#truggle, frisk#chao quay (noi tat)#show-case; stall; department#to carry with a shoulder pole; to carry on the end of a stick#to enclose#to fret; to snivel#to stir up; to move#to turn; to revolve; to swivel#o whirl; to reverse; to turn back
quay cop`to crib, to copy
quay cuong`to whirl
quay dao`Disturb, derange
quay di`Turn away from, turn one's back
quay do`in a dead faint
quay giao`Turn one's arms against
quay got`Turn on one's heels
quay lai`Turn round#ome back, return
quay lo`[Fall] in a dead faint#quay do
quay lung`Turn one's back on
quay ngoat`Turn round
quay nhieu`worry; pester
quay pha`Harass
quay phim`to film, to record
quay qua`Careless, perfunctory#Pester with requests (for help...)
quay quan`to gather around; to cluster
quay quat`eceitful; false; devious
quay quay`Refuse flatly, turn down roundly#nhu nguay nguay
quay rap`Round up
quay ray`to annoy; to bother; to balger
quay roi`to disturb, to harass, to derange
quay tit`(khau ngu: quay tit tho lo)#urn like a teetotum
quay tu`Cluster round, rally round
quay vong`Su quay vong von (kinh te)#apital turnover
que`Go; forecast; lots#Poultry#cinnamon-tree;cinnamon (bark)#crippled; disabled; lame#native place#rustic; unregined#stick
que chi`Cinnamon twig
que choc lo`Fire-irons
que coi`Poker
que dan`knitting-needle
que dun nuoc`Sulmersion heater
que han`soldering stick
que hoe`(cu; van chuong) Grown-up and successful children
que huong`native land; father land
que moc`nhu kim moc
que mua`levorish, rustic
que nguoi`danh tu strange country, foreign land
que nha`One's own native place
que quan`Native village, native country
que quat`lame; hackneyed
quech quac`Careless
quen`Mat, clot, be (become) tangled#familia; acquainted#be acquainted with; be used to#poor; petty; indiffenent#to for get
quen bang`Forget entirely
quen beng`Clear forget
quen biet`Be acquainted with
quen hoi`Attached to
quen khuay`Forget completely
quen lang`o sink into oblivious
quen le`Fall into the habit of
quen lung`nhu quen bang
quen minh`Be self-sacrificing
quen mui`Relapse from force of habit
quen net`Have the bad habit of
quen tay`Skilled
quen than`Inveterate
quen thoi`have the habit of
quen thuoc`Acquainted for long, familiar, of an old acquaintance
queo`Bent; twisted#Trip up#each with a hook, hook#bachang mango#to turn
queo co`Distorted; twisted#nderlanded, fishy
queo quat`nhu quat queo
quet`to coat; spread; to lay thickly#to knead#to strike; to rule#Match#to sweep
quet dat`Sweep the ground
quet don`to clean; to clean up; to tidy up
quet tran`etel quid's juice
quet trau`Betel quid's juice
quet tuoc`to sweep up, to tidy up
queu quao`Awkward, clumsy with one's limbs
qui`danh tu devil; monster#fund; treasury#quarter qui hai quarter two#valuable; precious#to treasure; to esteem#sun flower; turnsole#to kneel#to collapse; to drop down#tortoise#to recognize; to state
qui che`tatute; regulation
qui dao`rbit; trajectory
qui dinh`to degine; to stipulate
qui khach`onoured guest
qui mo`ize, demension; scale#arge scale
qui phai`igh-borm; aristocratic
qui quyet`rafty; very cunning
qui thuat`agic; conjuring tricks
qui tich`ocus
qui toc`obility; aristocracy
qui trinh`rocess
qui uoc`o agree by consent
qui vat`aluable thing
quit`mandarin; mandarine#to welch; to refuse to pay
quo`Feel, grope for#to scold; to reprove#to walk off with
quo mang`Chide, scold, reprove
quo quang`Grope for, feel for#Put a jinx on (bring bad luck on) by a praise
quo trach`Scold severely; dress down
quoc`nation; state; contry
quoc ca`national anthem
quoc cong`grand duke
quoc dan`people; nation
quoc doanh`state-run; state-managed
quoc gia`state; nation; country
quoc giao`national religion
quoc hoi`parliament; congress; national assembly
quoc huu hoa`to nationalize
quoc huy`national emblem, heraldry
quoc khanh`national celebration
quoc ky`ational flag; national colours
quoc lo`national highway
quoc ngu`National language#Quoc Ngu (national language) resided in borrowing the Latin to transcribe the Vietnamese. In the 17th century, the Western evangelists came to Vietnam to preach Christianism and used the Latin alphabet to transcribe the Vietnamese. In 1651, Alexandre Rhodes published An Nam Portuguese and Latin Dictionary. In the early 19th century, Pigneau de Behaine and Taberd published An Nam -Latin Dictionary. Step by step, Quoc Ngu replaced Han (Chinese) and nom languages to become the Vietnamese official language
quoc phong`national defence
quoc su quan`(tu cu) National historiographer's office
quoc te`danh tu; international
quoc te hoa`Internationalize
quoc te ngu`Esperanto
quoc tich`nationlaty
quoc tu giam`(tu cu) Royal college
quoc van`national literature
quoc vu khanh`Secretary of state, minister without portfolio
quoc vu vien`Council of National Affairs, Cabinet (in some countries)
quoc xa`nazi
quy`Collapse, drop down#Fund, bank#Sunflower, heliotrope#itmus#neel#The tenth Heavenly stem#demon, devil, fiend, satan#quy ban (noi tat).#thuc vat, duoc hoc) (duong quy noi tat) Ashweed#ring together, converge#ecognize; state#onvert
quy ban`Tortoise's shell
quy cach`Mode, procedure, recipe, standard
quy cach hoa`Standardize
quy chieu`He quy chieu (toan hoc)#ystem of reference
quy cong`Attribute a service (to somebody), credit (somebody) with a service
quy cu`Method, methodical style of work
quy hang`Bow to, surrender, capitulate
quy hoach`Scheme, projet
quy ke`Devilish trick
quy lay`Prostrate oneself
quy luat`Law
quy men`Love and esteem
quy mo`Size, dimension, scale#n a large scale, large-scale
quy quai`satanic, demoniac, demoniacal, devilish
quy quyet`Very cunning, crafty
quy su`Devil's servant, little devil
quy tac`Rule
quy than`Deities, genii
quy thuat`Prestidigitation, conjuring tricks
quy uoc`Establish as a convention, agree by consent#onvention, consent
quyen`(tu cu) Dead tired, exhausted#tick, adhere#Glosy black silk gauze#Right#ower#boxing#acting; ad interim#swamp-hen#to make a collection; to subseribe#volume; tome; book
quyen Anh`[English] boxing
quyen bien`Deal aptly with emergencies#to deal aptly with emergences
quyen binh`power, influence
quyen do`Entice, seduce
quyen giao`Make a collection for a charity
quyen gop`Raise a subscription; subscribe
quyen han`power; authority
quyen hanh`power, authority
quyen loi`interest
quyen luc`power and ingluence
quyen luyen`to attach
quyen mon`(tu cu) Influential circle
quyen nang`Juridical capacity
quyen nghi`(tu cu) Adapt oneself to circumstances
quyen quy`(tu cu) Of rank and fashion
quyen ru`to seduce; to attract
quyen sinh`to take one's own life
quyen than`Power-usurping courtier
quyen the`Authority and influence
quyen thuat`boxing
quyen thuoc`parents; relatives
quyen uy`power, authority
quyet`Cunning, deceitful#to decide; to determine
quyet chi`Set one's mind
quyet chien`decisive battle
quyet dinh`to decide; to resolve; to determine
quyet dinh luan`Determinism
quyet doan`Appraise (assess) with certainty
quyet liet`drastic
quyet nghi`Resolve#esolution
quyet nhien`Decidedly
quyet tam`determined, decisive
quyet thang`Set one's mind on victory (success)
quyet toan`to draw the balancesheet
quyet y`Set one's mind on (something), be determined to
quynh`(thong tuc) Bumpkin, simpleton#Be beside oneself, be out of one's wits#ruby phyllocactus
quynh boi`(tu cu) Ruby cup
quynh tuong`(old) good wine
quyt`Fail to pay, default#Mandarin, mandarine#tu cu) Thang quyt#oung servant
ra`Check#un in (a new engine)#Crumble, fall off#closely-woven basket#rice stubble#all the children of a family#to go out; to come out
ra bo`As if
ra canh`Fly one's wings off (of birds)
ra chieu`With an air
ra cong`Take [great] pains with (over)
ra da`Scar over (of a wound)
ra dang`to put on
ra di`to depart; to start; to leave
ra di an`(toan hoc) Radian
ra di o`Radio
ra dieu`Assume the look of
ra doi`to be born; to come into being
ra gi`Worthless
ra gieng`Once Tet is over, after Tet
ra he`Hold a ceremony for the end of summer
ra hieu`to signal; to make signal
ra hon`(thuong dung voi y phu ddi.nh) Quite, fully#orth; presentable
ra hong`Exhausted [with speaking]
ra lenh`Promulgate, issue
ra linh`o order; to dictate; to command#o issue;to promulgate
ra mat`to appear, to come into sight#to show oneself, to come out#overtly, openly
ra mom`Raise one's voice against (in protest)
ra ngoi`(nong nghiep) Transplant
ra ngu`Desert en masse from the army
ra nguoi`Become a decent person, become a respectable person#e worthy of being a man#Worn-out, tired out, played out
ra oai`to put on airs
ra on`Grant favours
ra phet`(thong tuc) Mighty
ra quan`Commit (troops) to battle, place (troops) in battle-array
ra ra`incessant, draning
ra ram`Grope one's way
ra rang`Full-fledged
ra ria`discarded, neglected
ra rich`Continual, persistent
ra roi`Crumble#ery wearied, exhausted
ra suc`to strive, to exert oneself
ra tay`Show off, show what stuff one is made off#et about, begin (to do something)
ra toa`to appear before a court
ra tran`Go to the front
ra tro`(thong tuc) Mighty, very#Be reduced to ashes
ra tuong`Turn out to be, prove to be
ra vao`Go in and out; come in and out
ra ve`pretend
ra vien`Leave hospital, be discharged from hospital
rac`Ebb#be worn thin#garbage; reguse; litter; rubbish#to sprinkle;to dust
rac cang`tire oneself out by walking
rac mat`(thong tuc) Offend the eye
rac rai`Emaciated, worn thin
rac roi`complex; complicated; intricate
rac ruoi`Litter, garbage, refuse#regs
rac tai`(thong tuc) Offend the ear
rach`Small irrigation canal; irrigation ditch; arrogo#to leap from the water to slit; to slash#torn
rach buom`Torn to shreds, tattered
rach muop`Torn to shreds, ragged
rach nat`Torn to pieces
rach roi`clear; distinctly
rach ruoi`ragged; in rags
rach tuom`Tattered, ragged
rai`rai ca (noi tat)#it dung) Be frightened#ive up, dread#to spread; to scatter; to lay
rai ca`otter
rai rac`scattered#to scatter
rai tham`Nem bom rai tham#o carpet-bomb
ram`Beam#oud, noisy#Force#Fragrant khotweed#The fifteenth of the lunar month, the full-moon day#Wind#[Be] sunburnt#nhu nham#ream (of paper)#to fry#shady bong ram shade#species of crab#thick; bushy; dense
ram bep`Damp down a fire
ram but`ibiscus
ram chia`(xay dung) console
ram mat`Shady and fresh; in the shade
ram nang`sunburnt
ram ram`xem ram (lay)
ram ran`Rumble#ll over
ram rap`All to a man, all at the same time#Bushy, dense#Stamping noises#xem rap (lay)
ram rat`(dia phuong) xem giam giat
ram ri`(it dung) Blustering, clamorous#Thickly wooded, bushy#to whisper; to murmur
ram rich`With animation, with excitement
ram ro`pho tu noisily; loudly
ram rut`Khoc ram rut#eep softly for a long time
ram vo`Choose beforehand a possible match (for one's son)
ran`(dia phuong) Stable#(dia phuong) Striped#(dia phuong) xem dan#Admonish#Contract muscles#thong tuc) Be delivered of#Resound widely#pread widely#cracked; crackled#hard; rigid#snake; serpent#louse#nhu ran#to fry#to try; to endeavour#some more
ran bao`Admonish, advise
ran buoc`xem dan buoc
ran cac`Hardened
ran cap nia`Black and white - ringed krait
ran cap nong`Yellow and black-ringed krait
ran chac`hard and solid, firm
ran de`Deter
ran doc dua`coluber
ran giun`Blindworm
ran ho lua`krait
ran ho mang`copperhead
ran lai`Coluber
ran luc`dendrophis
ran mang banh`Cobra
ran mat`Stubborn, wilful, obstinate
ran moi`(dia phuong) Lizard
ran nuoc`Water - snake, grass - snake
ran nut`be harmed; crack
ran ran`(dia phuong) xem dan dan#to tingle
ran rao`Coluber
ran rat`(dia phuong) Numerous and well - off#Noisily; tumultuously#xem rat (lay)
ran ret`Snake and centipede; venomous snakes
ran ri`Striped, checquered
rang`Begin to break#e an honour to#he small hours of#Coloured cloud on the sky-line#ry, endeavour#ome more#chain; line; row#that#to fasten; to bind; to tie up#to roast; to pop#tooth
rang buoc`tie down
rang cua`Serrated#danh tu incisor
rang danh`Bring fame to, shed lustre on
rang dong`Day break, dawn
rang gia`false teeth ; artifcial teeth
rang ham`Molar
rang khon`wisdom-tooth
rang moc`Fang (of snake)
rang nanh`camine tooth, eye-tooth
rang ngay`At daybreak, at dawn
rang rac`xem rac (lay)
rang rang`xem rang (lay)
rang rit`Tie intricately
rang ro`distinguished; radiant
rang sua`Milk-tooth
rang suc`Try, endeavour
ranh`be free; to have leisure#drain; gutter#sly; mischievous#to know well
ranh con`little devil
ranh gioi`limit; border line; frontier
ranh khon`Cunning, sly
ranh ma`artful, sly
ranh mach`connected and clear; logical and clear
ranh manh`mischievous, sly
ranh mat`not to see
ranh no`End one's trouble, be a good riddance
ranh rang`spare, free ; bisure
ranh ranh`xem ranh (lay)
ranh roi`Unoccupied, idle, free
ranh rot`Clear
ranh tay`to have free hands
ranh than`Be able to rest; be free of cares
ranh truot`(ky thuat) Coulisse
ranh vat`Cunning
ranh viec`Be no longer busy, be free
rao`Accelerate, quicken (one's pace)#Fishing-net stake#Lose resiliency, becomeloose,be worn out#dry#fence; hedge; palsade#to enclose; to shut in; to hedge#to cry; to announce
rao don`nhu don rao
rao giau`Hedge, fence
rao hang`Cry one's wares; advertise
rao hoanh`Bone-dry,dry as a stick
rao rao`Cascading noise#Grating noise
rao riet`keen; hectic
rao ruc`to feel excited; to have sensation of excitement
rap`Be about to, be on the point of.#ne is on the point of retiring into the country to enjoy nature#Block up with thorny branches#over up#tent; booth flat on the ground#to copy closely#to fit; to assemble; to join together
rap chieu bong`Picture-palace, movie house; cinema
rap hat`theatre
rap khuon`Imitate servilely, ape, copy
rap noi`(ky thuat) Strike
rap rap`xem rap (lay)
rap rinh`Resound low and high#ob
rap ron`to float
rap xiec`Circus
rat`Entirely, wholly, altogether#marting#very; very much; most#extremely, excessively
rat doi`Extremely, excessively
rat mat`Feel a burning sensation on one's face#eel ashamed
rat muc`exceptionally
rat rat`xem rat (lay)
rat ruot`Be in agony
rau`beard#greens; vegetables#sad; roarowful
rau be`Laminaria (a king of alga)
rau bi`Pumpkin buds
rau cai`Cabbage
rau can`Water dropwort
rau can tay`Celeri
rau cau`Gracilaria
rau chao`Greens and rice soup; poor food
rau co`Vegetables, greens
rau le`Orache
rau ma`Centella
rau may`nhu may rau
rau mep`Moustache
rau quap`Curled-down moustache#enpecked
rau ri`Gloomy, melancholy
rau ria`Beaud and moustaches
rau rut`Neptunia
rau tre`Barbel-like (whisker-like) moustache
rau xom`Bushy beard, thick beard
ray`Ear-wax, cerumen.#thuc vat) Alocasia#Rail, metals#Sprinkle#kitchen-garden#to chide; to rebuke; to scold#to sift; to bolt; to tummy#tu ray ve sau from now on
ray la`Scold noisily
ray ra`to be troublesome
ray rat`Nag
ray tai`ear-wax; cerumen
re`(dia phuong) nhu ve Edge, side#(thuc vat) xem de#Trumpet#hine obliquely, splash obliquely#bamboo basket used as pad for hot pots#cheap; inexpensive; low in price#root#son-in-law; bridegroom#to be cracked (chuong)#of bell) to round cracked#to cleave; to turn#to faw by the wind
re ben`(thuc vat) Lateral root
re cai`(thuc vat) Main root
re chum`(thuc vat) Fasciculate root
re coc`(thuc vat) Tap-root
re con`(thuc vat) Radicle, rootlet
re cu`(thuc vat) Tuberous root
re doi`Fork
re duyen`Separate married people
re mat`Dirt-cheap
re ngang`Give up one's study (in search of a job)
re quat`Hinh re quat
re ra`Dawdling, drawling
re rang`Clear and easy to understand
re re`Dawdling, dragging, trailing#xem re (lay)
re roi`Coherent and clear
re rot`Soft and distinct
re rung`Think little of, slight, hold cheap
re thoi`(thong tuc) Dirt-cheap
re tien`Cheap
rech`Dirty, unwashed, still not clean
rech rac`Filthy
rem`blind
ren`Banh chung ren#venly soft sticky rice square cakes#n successive salvoes (rounds, peals)#Walk softly; walk shily#lace#o forge#to groan; to moan
ren buoc`Tiptoe, walk gingerly
ren cap`Coach, tutor, bring up with care
ren duc`Train, form
ren la`Moan and cry#ament
ren luyen`to form; to train
ren ram`Moan, lamen
ren ren`xem ren (lay)
ren ri`Groan#Lament incessantly
ren siet`Lament, groan; writhe
ren xiet`to groan; to moan
renh rang`(dia phuong) xem denh dang
reo`Piece (of cloth, paper)#ut the edge of (cloth, paper)#kirt#to halloo; to call out to#to shout; to cheer
reo cao`Highland, high mountain area
reo ho`Shout for joy, shout for encouragement
reo mung`Shout from joy
reo no`Dun
reo rat`xem gieo giat
reo reo`Snivel constantly
reo roc`Toss about in one's bed
rep`bug; bed-bug
rep son`Cochineal
ret`centipede#to be cold
ret buot`Piercingly cold
ret cong`Freezing cold
ret muot`Cold (noi khai quat)
ret nang Ban`Cold in the third lunar month
ret ngot`Biting cold
reu`(dia phuong) Overripe, pulpy#Drift-wood (on a river in flood)#moss; lichen
reu ra`Wonky, shaky
reu rao`nhu xeu xao#to speak ill of; to divulge
ri`(dia phuong) This, this way#(dia phuong) Tug back, pull back#(tu cu) Female conjurror of dead souls#Lush#xcessively, extremely#to leak; to drip#to rust; to get rusty
ri hoi`Open one's lips
ri ra`Sporadic
ri rach`Drip
ri ram`Murmur
ri rang`(thong tuc) Wisper a word, breathe a word
ri rao`to rustle
ri ri`Whimpering#xem ri (lay)#xem ri (lay)
ri tai`Whisper in someone's ear
ria`(dia phuong) Covered with cracked glaze#edge; fringe#rim; edge; border#to peck; to strike with the beak (of fish) to nibble (at) the bait
ria ray`Harass with scolding, harass with humiliating remarks
ria roi`xem ria ray
rich`Like hell, very#Rinh rich (lay y tang)
rieng`Galingale, alpinia (kind of zingiberaceous plant).#thong tuc) Abuse, scold, rebuke#special; especial; peculiar; private; own
rieng biet`Distinct; secluded
rieng le`Individually, severally, separately#rivate, not joining a co-op
rieng re`Separate
rieng tay`Private, personal
rieng tu`Personal, private
riet`(dia phuong) nhu rit#Pull tight, pull taut#xert oneself to the utmost, strive one's utmost#trict, severe, stern
riet rao`Strict, severe
riet rong`nhu riet
rieu`Sour soup
rieu cua`crab soup
rim`Simmer (some food) until it is dry
rin`to ooze; to sweat
rin rit`xem rit (lay)
rinh`(dia phuong) Carry [with both hands]#oisily#mall drum beat#(dia phuong) xem din#to watch; to waylay
rinh mo`Lurk, watch for
rinh rang`Pompous, ostentatious
rinh rap`Lie in wait, be on the watch
rinh rich`Muffled sound (of footsteps...)
rit`Wail; whistle,whizz#uff deeply at#ot to work smoothly#to tie up; to dress
rit rang`Clench one's teeth
riu`Get entangled, get fouled#axe; hack
riu riu`Low
ro`(of face) to be pock-marked#(y hoc) Fistule#eak#Bag.#thong tuc) Pinch#Profuse, profuse and vigorous#Small square fishing-net#atch [by chance]#basket#cage; trap#clear#diamond#mad; crazy#savage; barbarian#to clean#to drip; to ooze#to feel; to touch; to handle#xem an ro
ro bot`Robot
ro chang`(dia phuong) Thickly pock-marked
ro dai`(dia phuong) nhu nho dai#Foolish, silly
ro giot`(dia phuong) nhu nho giot
ro hoa`Thinly and superficially pock-marked
ro kheo`Now then; now, now
ro manh`Roman
ro mo`(dia phuong) nhu so mo 
ro mom`Snout-ring; muzzle
ro ram`Feel in the dark, grope in the dark
ro rang`clear; evident; plain#nhu ro.
ro ray`(khau ngu) Be restless
ro ret`Clear, evident, plain
ro ro`Purr, hum (of machines)#nhu ru ru
roc`Small arroyo, small ditch#Waste, be wasted#to bark; to peel#to cut open leaves a book
roc ket`Rocket
roc rach`to babble
roi`(dia phuong) nhu ruoi #Bright#Fishing-boat#already; then; after#to finish#switch; rod cane#tangled; entangled#to be free; unoccupied#to break off; to break loose; to leave#to fall; to drop; to come down#to light; to beam#xem doi
roi beng`In a muddle; entangled
roi bo`Leave, abandon
roi boi`Be in a stir and a jumble
roi bu`Dishevelled, ruffed (of hair)
roi da`hip
roi day`Later, in the future, eventually
roi doi`(dia phuong, thong tuc) Gone; dead
roi hoi`Waste one's time (on something)
roi le`to shed tears
roi loan`troubled; confused
roi mat`In a jumble, in a muddle#Take one's eyes off
roi mieng`Have just finished speaking
roi mu`Muddled
roi ra`In the future#exhausted
roi rac`disconnected; disjointed
roi rai`nhu roi
roi ram`Very complicated, involved
roi ren`confused
roi rit`to bustle
roi roi`xem roi (lay)
roi rot`left, remain
roi rung`Be lost gradually, go gradually
roi ruot`Lose self-control, be upset
roi sao`Well, what then?
roi tay`Knock off, have a break#Let go of (somebody, something); part with#nock off, have a rest
roi tinh`Mixed up
roi tri`upset, muddling
roi tung`Be intricately tangled
roi vai`Be spilled, scatter
roi viec`Be not very busy, have little to do
roi vot`Cane, rod (used as an instrument for punishing shildren)
rom`(dia phuong) nhu ruom #Be moist with#Grotesque, ludicrous#Not exposed to the sun, in the shade#Prickly heat, heat rash#oisterous, noisily merry#Thick and widespread#Very thin#nhu rum#straw
rom ra`nhu rom
rom rac`trash, rubbish
rom rom`xem rom (lay)
rom say`Prickly heat
rom tro`Lively, exciting
ron`Beside oneself#Raise a fuss, be in a bustle, bustle#Shiver with fear#Shiver with fear, have one's flesh creeping#navel
ron lai`ake another effort and stay on, sit on and wait
ron ra`In a boisterous brouhaha
ron rang`xem nhon nhang
ron rao`xem nhon nhao
ron ren`to walk on tiptoe
ron ron`xem ron (lay)
ron rot`xem nhon nhot#xem nhon nhot
rong`(Bot) alga; seaweed#to go about from place to place#Rise#broad; wide; extensive; ample#danh tu dragon#empty; hollow#to bellow ; to roar ; to growl#to ebb; flow back to the sea#pure
rong bung`broad-minded, generous, forbearing
rong cang`Free
rong choi`to wander
rong huyet`menorrhagia
rong khong`Completely empty
rong kinh`nhu rong huyet
rong lon`wide
rong luong`tolerant; generous; magnanimous
rong ra`Uninterrupted, without a break, on end
rong rai`Spacious, commodious#enerous, liberal, free-handed; broad
rong ran`Fellow-my-leader
rong roc`to flow abundantly
rong rong`(dong vat) Snake-head mullet fry#Flow uninterruptedly, pour out (off)
rong ruoi`(cung viet) giong ruoi Travel far and double - quick.#ravelling far and double - quick with bow and arrows in one's back
rong ruot`Hollow
rong thenh thang`ast; spacious
rong tuech`Completely empty, completely hollow, completely void
rop`Be shady, be in the shade#vershadow#xem giop
rop bong`Shady, in the shade
rop dat`Cover a large extent of earth (with flags...)
rop troi`Overshadow the sky, cloud the sky
rot`Last#to fall; to drop#to pour
rot cuoc`finally; at last; after all
rot dai`Dripping saliva
rot long`Last (child)
ru`(tu cu) nhu ru#Call for (someone and ask him to go or do something with one)#ang down#Gloomy#Affected by Newcastle's disease (noi ve ga)#forest#to scream; to yell#to be tired out#to droop; to hang#to rock; to sing; to lull ru con to lull one's child to sleep#xem nhuc
ru ngu`to lull to sleep
ru re`to invite; to entice
ru ri`(it dung) Coo#Be taciturn#Murmur softly, coo#Ru ri ru ri (lay)
ru ri ru ri`xem ru ri (lay)
ru ru`Hang about (at home)#xem ru (lay)
ru ruoi`emaciated; haggard
ru tu`(tu cu) Rot in jail, stay long in jail
rua`(dia phuong) Like that#bush-hook#to be rotten#to curse; to call down; to curse upon#to decompose, to get rot#to wash; to clean; to bathe#tortoise, turtle#xem giua 
rua anh`to develop a film
rua cua`Set a draw
rua man`(nong nghiep) Remove salt from; desalt (rice-fields)
rua nat`Decomposed and crushed
rua nhuc`o wash out an insult
rua ray`Wash (noi khai quat)
rua rua`xem rua (lay)
rua ruot`Administer an enema
rua toi`to baptize; to chaisten
ruc`Flaring up brightly, shining bright, blazing#rotten#to peck; to strike with the beak#to hoot; to toot#to put (one's head) into something
ruc dau`(xau) Slip one's head in
ruc ray`Creep (into dark and narrow places)
ruc ria`nhu ruc
ruc rich`Biggle#to get ready
ruc ro`bright; radiant; effulgent
ruc sang`Shine bright, dazzle, brighten
ruc xuong`Rot in jail
rui`Rafter#Waste, ravaged completely#unlucky; unhappy
rui may`[By] pure chance
rui ro`Risk#nlucky, unfortunate
rum`Rock-salt.#dia phuong) Noisy, boisterous#Safflower#um#Shrivelled
rum beng`(thong tuc) Ballyhoo, undue fuss
rum ro`Battered; deformed
run`(it dung) Draw back, draw in, retract#[Be] flabby, [be] faint#to tremble; to quiver ;to shiver;to quaver
run chi`Be flabby in one's will, have a flabby will
run ray`Tremble uncontrollably#Walk with a springy gait (step)
run rui`As by an arrangenment of fate
run run`xem run (lay)
run so`to shake with fright
rung`Sea fishing-net#hake gently and horizontally#to fall; to drop#to shake; to shake down#wood; forest; jungle#wild; savage
rung cam`Protected forest#Throb with emotion
rung chuyen`Shake violently, quake#ake a strong impact on
rung dong`to vibrate
rung gia`Forest of high trees
rung minh`to tremble; to feel creepy
rung mo`xem dung mo
rung nguyen sinh`Primitive forest
rung nguyen thuy`Virgin forest
rung nui`Forest and mountain; forest
rung ra rung rinh`xem rung rinh (lay)
rung ram`dense wood; thick forest
rung reng`Clink
rung rinh`Be clinking with plenty of money#Quiver
rung roi`panic-stricken
rung ron`dreadful;terrifying; ghastly
rung ru`Brushwood
rung ruc`Frayed, shabby (noi ve quan ao)#xem nhung nhuc#xem ruc (lay)
rung rung`Stamping#to have tears welling up#xem rung (lay)
rung trung`(sinh) Ovulation
rung xanh`Forest
ruoc`salted shredded meat#to receive; to greet; to welcome
ruoc bong`Fluffy pemmican
ruoc khach`o welcome a guest
ruoi`(dia phuong) nhu duoi#(dong vat) Clam worm, sand-worm, nereid#(it dung) Pursue, go after#Bracingly, refreshingly#ery#Fifty, five hundred, five thousand, half#fly#con ruoi#half#to sprinkle; to souse
ruoi giam`Drosophila
ruoi muoi`Fly and mosquito
ruoi nhang`Fly and bluebottle; flies
ruoi ruoi`xem ruoi (lay)
ruoi trau`Gadfly
ruom`Redundant, superfluous, wordy#to ooze; to sweat#xem nhuom
ruom ra`verbose; prolix; wordy
ruom tai`Unpalatable
ruon`(tu cu) Overindulge#Grane
ruon ruot`Dripping wet
ruong`Abandon, repudiate#Hollowed out (by borers...)#Kingpost#box; trunk#rice-field; paddy-field
ruong bac thang`Terraced fields
ruong bo`(dia phuong) nhu can quet#to chesert; to abandon
ruong cong`Public field
ruong cot`supports and columns#hinh anh) keystone
ruong dat`cultivated land, land
ruong dong`Fields
ruong hom`Trunks
ruong ma`Rice-seeding field
ruong muoi`salt-marsh
ruong nat`Decayed
ruong nuong`fields and gardens ; field
ruong ray`nhu ruong nuong#to forsake; to desent
ruong roc`Fields between two hills
ruong vuon`Fields and gardens
ruot`danh tu bowel; intestine; entrails#to chase; to pursue
ruot chay`(giai phau) Jejunum
ruot ga`eoil
ruot gan`Heart, mind
ruot gia`large intestine
ruot hoi`(giai phau) Ileum
ruot ket`(giai phau) Colon
ruot non`small intestine
ruot ra`Blood relation
ruot thang`(giai phau) Rectum
ruot theo`o cut after; to pursue
ruot thit`By birth, by the same parents
ruot thua`(Anat) appendix
ruot tit`(giai phau) Caecum
ruou`wine; liquor; drink; alcohol
ruou bia`beer
ruou cam`Violet rice wine
ruou can`Ruou can (wine drunk out of a jar through pipes) is very popular among the highlanders, especially in Tay Nguyen. But its flavour differs from one area to another. In Son La (some 300 km north-west of Ha Noi), for example, where the Thai ethnic groups are to be found, people drink ruou can in their own special way. It is drunk on several occasions: Tet festival, wedding parties, ground-breaking ceremonies or other festive days. The jar containing the wine is put at a fixed place (in the middle of the house or the yard), so that as many people as possible can drink it. Pipes are put into the jar prior to drinking and a basinful of pure water is placed beside it. A buffalo horn to be used to pour water into the jar is put on a tray nearby. Not everyone is allowed to drink ruou can. And the order of precedence is strictly observed. But there is no racial discrimination: the Kinh ( Viet) may drink with the Thai and Muong. The ingredients of ruou can include wild leaves, cassava roots and rice which are washed and put above an oven for 20 days or so Then all the mixed ingredients are wrapped with large banana leaves and left in a corner of the house for a couple of days. As soon as the process of fermentation is completed, the whole brew is put into a jar. When all the guests are seated, the host pours water from the basin into the jar. At first, he invites the guests to taste the wine from a jar whose wine is more bitter than others. This is meant to remind everyone of the bitterness of life. Then a second jar is brought in which the wine tastes more pungent. In the third jar, the wine is sweetest symbolizing that " your heart can be happy after so much grief". Drinking ruou can is accompanied by Mua Xoe (a dance of the Thai ethnic minorities) and drum beating. All this is to help the host and guests forget all their daily worries and enjoy to the utmost the pleasure of tasting ruou can. (VNS)
ruou chat`ine
ruou che`Alcoholism
ruou de`ice alcohol
ruou khai vi`Aperitif
ruou lau`Illegal wine
ruou le`(ton trong) Mass wine
ruou manh`Strong alcohol; brandy
ruou vang`wine
rup`Rouble
rut`Pull off; tear#ear oneself away#to pull out; to draw out; to get out#to withdraw; to take back
rut bot`Diminish, reduce
rut chay`Withdraw and take [to] flight
rut cuc`In the end, at last
rut cuoc`(dia phuong) nhu rut cuc
rut gon`(toan) Reduce
rut lai la`Boil down to
rut lui`to stand down; to withdraw
rut mu`(y hoc) Drain
rut ngan`to abridge; to curtail
rut rat`xem nhut nhat
rut re`timid; coy; shy
rut ruot`Draw from the centre#verexert oneself#orm, squeeze money out#Have one's heart (soul) wrung (with agony, sadness)
rut tia`Draw
sa`citronella#to cut into pieces#gauze#fall, drop#not at all#to sow, to seed#to throw oneself
sa ban`danh tu model
sa bao`not much
sa boi`Alluvial
sa canh`Having one's arms (wings) limp with weariness
sa chan`to trip
sa chi`(nhu) sa gi
sa co`to land, to fal, to go to the dogsl
sa da`to overindulge
sa de`rchiocele
sa di`Orchiocele
sa doa`utterly depraved
sa gi`not matter
sa ke`irrespective of, regardless of
sa lan`barge
sa lay`to bog down
sa lech`Six-eight line tune (in traditional operetta)
sa lup`river motor boat
sa mac`desert
sa mon`Buddhist priest
sa mu`Fog
sa nga`be depraved
sa nhan`Amomum
sa quan`Not mind
sa sa`Nag
sa sam`(duoc) Adenophora#to cloud over
sa say`to suffer loss, to waste
sa sut`to fall down, to decline
sa thach`(khoang chat) Sandstone
sa thai`to dismiss, to sack
sa truong`(tu cu) Battlefield
sac`royal honour-conferring diploma#temple's exercising charm#colour#nhu) sac_dep, dau_sac#to extract, to simmer, to lead down#sharp#to choke to reek of
sac ben`(nhu) sac
sac canh`sharp, acute
sac chi`royal ordinance
sac chieu`royal proclamation
sac dep`beauty, glamour
sac dien`nhu sac mao
sac duc`Concupiscence, lust
sac gach`(thong tuc) Stretch one's powers, be fully stretched#Vomit blood#Very exhausting, very exacting
sac gioi`The World of Appearances
sac lenh`decree
sac luat`Decree (which has the force of a law)
sac mac`xem xac mac
sac mao`(y hoc) Habitus
sac mat`face, complexion countenance
sac nuoc`Sac nuoc huong troi#eauty#harp
sac phong`Honous, knight
sac phuc`(tu cu) Full dress (of mandarins)
sac sao`sharp-witted; fine, sharp
sac so`gaudy, showy
sac sua`reeking of; reekingly
sac thai`aspect, colour, colouring shade of meaning, nuance
sac tiet`(thong tuc) nhu sac mau
sac to`(sinh vat) Pigment
sac toc`Race, ethnic group
sac tu`(tu cu) Bestowed by royal decree
sach`book#clean, cleanly
sach bong`spotlessly clean, spotless
sach dan`(tu cu) Index
sach den`nhu den sach 
sach giao khoa`cu) stategem, strategy#extbooks
sach lich`Almanac
sach luoc`tactics
sach mat`pleasant-loking, sighty
sach nhieu`to harass for bribes
sach nuoc`Have just learned how to play chess
sach nuoc can`thong tuc) Be (look) comely (noi ve co gai)
sach phong`(tu cu) Confer a title of honour on (a woman)
sach se`clean, cleanly
sach toi`Be cleaned of all faults
sach trang`(Anh) White paper, white book
sach tron`(nhu) sach trui
sach trui`lean finished
sach vo`books#bookish, dogmatic
sach xanh`Blue book
sai`Boatman#Children's lasting and serious disease#fruitful, bearing much fruit false#to order, to send#ominous, inauspicious#spread of arms
sai bao`(nhu) sai
sai biet`divergent, wrong
sai canh`spread, span (of a bird's wings)
sai khien`Command, order
sai khop`Luxation, dislocation
sai lac`divergent
sai lam`erroneous, wrong, mistaken#mistake, error
sai lang`wolf fiendish person
sai lech`Aberrant; erroneous
sai ngoa`untruthful
sai nha`(tu cu) Soldiery and clerkdom (in district offices)
sai phai`(tu cu) Send on some business
sai pham`Derogation#istake, fault
sai so`error, odd
sai sot`error, mistake, shortcoming
sai suyen`Error, incorrection
sai trai`wrong
sam`Dark#Dark#Dusk#Sam_toi#bang, slam#to darken, to cloud over#browned, burnt, tawing#dark#ginseng#inner tube, tube#prophecy, oracle#thunder#purslain, portulaca king-crab#to go shopping, to shop, to go and buy (get)
sam bang`to run down, to disparage
sam banh`hampagne
sam cam`black coot
sam hoi`to repent, to show repentance
sam lop`tyre and tube
sam mat`Be shamefaced, lose face
sam mau`Of dark colour#dark - coloured
sam nam`xem xam nam 
sam nghiem`(tu cu) Decorous and quiet
sam ngon`prophetic saying
sam ngu`nhu sam ngon
sam nhung`Ginseng and buidding antler; strong tonics
sam ninh`to fawn upon (someone)
sam sam`xem sam (lay)#xem sam (lay)
sam sanh`Go shopping, shop
sam sap`xem sap 
sam set`thunder and thunderbolt#thunderlike
sam si`Be slightly different, differ slightly
sam so`Be too familiar; take liberties (with woman)
sam soi`Take (have) a good look at
sam sua`to make preparations, to make ready, to prepare
sam sut`crunchingly
sam thuong`Sam thuong doi nga#heir paths never cross
sam toi`ark, dusk
sam truyen`As prophesies
sam uat`grown with luxuriant vegetation#crowded, busy
sam vai`to act, to play role
san`(it dung) Revise#evel#phonetic variant of son in compounds) Mountain#(nhu) san sinh, sa?n_xuat#cassava, manioc#floor#grit#intestinal flat worm#to come up, to come near to#lumpy, full of pustules#pustular coarse#ready, available#at hand#to hunt, to hunt down#tightly twisted#shrinking, shrunk#swift#to rush at, to rush headlong at#yard, courtyard, court#ground, course
san ban`to hunt, to go for a hunt
san bang`to level, to raze to the ground
san bat`to hunt down
san bay`airport
san bim`Big tree's creeper#(tu cu; van chuong) Concubine
san bong`ootball ground, pitch
san choi`Playground
san co`(nhu) san#football ground
san dan`Swarm (of bees)
san dao`(it dung) Dangerous mountain road
san day`Kudzu#cestode worm
san dien`Stage
san dinh`to revise
san dip`on the occasion of, by the way
san don`Welcome solicitingly
san duc`Give birth to and bring up
san duoi`Chase
san gac`Flat roof, sun roof
san gan`Sinewy, brawny
san hau`post-natal
san ho`coral
san hoe`(tu cu; van chuong) Brothers of the same family
san khau`stage
san khoa`obstetrics
san la`fluke worm
san lai`(tu cu; van chuong) Parents#ascaris
san long`be willing to, be prepared to
san luong`yield, output, production
san mat`Be shamefaced; lose face#Lumpy#Shamefaced
san nghiep`property, estate
san pham`product
san phang`Level, smooth the surface of
san phoi`Drying ground
san phu`Woman in childbirth; lying-in woman
san rong`Court in front of the royal palace
san san`be about the same#xem san (lay)
san sang`ready, prepared willing to
san sat`(nhu) sat#Crunchy#Without stopping#nhu ca thia 
san sau`Backyard
san se`to share
san si`to rush in; to fly into a temper
san sinh`to generate, to produce, to yield
san so`to rush violently at
san soc`to nurse, to look after
san sui`lumpy
san suong`Yard (noi chung)
san tay`At hand, within reach
san thuong`Terrace
san tin`Hunt for information
san van dong`stadium
san vat`product
san xo mit`taenia
san xuat`to produce, to make, to manufacture#production
sang`bright, light#lear,laminous#morning#coffin#danh tu, dong tu sieve, screen#tinh tu, dong tu delirious, to rave#to cross#n, into, on to, aside#expensive, luxurious
sang bach`Full daylight
sang bong`shining
sang che`to invent#invention
sang choang`very bright, brightly-lit
sang choi`dazzlingly bright, brilliant
sang da`tinh tu quick-witted
sang doat`(it dung) Appropriate, rob
sang doc`Boil and pustule
sang khoai`cheery, buoyant
sang kien`innovation, initiative
sang lang`Quick-witted, intelligent
sang lap`to found
sang loa`Dazzlingly bright, blindingly bright
sang loang`glittering
sang loc`to creen, to select
sang loe`nhu sang loa
sang mai`Early morning#Tomorrow morning
sang mat`to have good eyesight,be seen sighted
sang nam`Next year
sang ngang`to cross
sang ngay`nhu sang mai 
sang nghiep`Found (a dynasty)
sang ngoi`bright, brightly light
sang quac`Dazzlingly shining, flashing
sang ro`Full daylight; broad daylight#Self-evident
sang ruc`right, blazing
sang sac`cackling
sang sang`sonorous#xem sang (lay)
sang say`Sift and winnow
sang so`to shift gear, to change up
sang som`early morning
sang sua`very light, bright, luminous
sang suot`clear-sighted, lucid, perspicacious
sang tac`to create, to produce, to compose
sang tai`keen-eared
sang tao`to create#creative
sang tay`(viet tat) sang
sang ten`to transfer
sang tieu`Place somebody's remains in a small terra-cotta coffin (for definitive burial)
sang to`(it dung) Bright day#lear
sang trang`(nghia bong) Turn over a page (of history)#cung nhu sang giang
sang tri`Quick-minded; quick-witted
sang trong`luxurious and elegant
sang trung`dazzlingly bright
sang tuyen`Sort out (ores)
sang y`quick-witted
sanh`(nhu) sinh#(tu cu) Office building#rawing-room#glazed terra-cotta#be conversant with, be a connoisseur in#viscid, viscous#spill
sanh an`Be a connoisseur in (of) food
sanh buoc`to walk abreast, to stroll abreast to catch up with, to overtake
sanh doi`nhu sanh duyen
sanh duong`Yamen#esidence (of madarins)
sanh duyen`to be joined in marriage; to get married to
sanh nghe`Ve very skilled in one's trade
sanh sanh`xem sach
sanh soi`accomplished, efficient, well-experienced
sanh tay`Match, compare with, bear comparison with
sanh vai`to walk abreast to be well-matched
sao`Bamboo lattice basket#ive birth prematurely#Stereotyped, trite#Short and small bamboo blinds#yna, mynah (chim)#lute#pole perch, rod#star#to tell tales, to peach
sao Hoa`Mars
sao Kim`Venus
sao Moc`Jupiter
sao Tho`Saturn
sao Thuy`Mercury
sao bac cuc`Pole Star
sao bac dau`The Great Bear
sao ban`copy, duplicat
sao bang`Cannot compare with.#shooting star, bolide
sao bien`(dong vat) Starfish
sao che`Treat, process (medicinal herbs)
sao chep`to copy, to transcribe
sao choi`comet
sao chup`Photocopy
sao da`Chinese starling
sao dang`How can one have the heart to
sao danh`how can one tolerate, why.?
sao doi ngoi`nhu sao bang
sao hom`evening star
sao huyet`den
sao lang`xem sao nhang
sao luc`Copy from the original
sao mai`morning star
sao mep`Be a chatterbox
sao mon`Commonplace; hackneyed cliche
sao ngu`Cliche
sao nhang`(tu cung viet) sao lang Neglect
sao no`How can one have the heart to
sao rong`Trite and hollow
sao sa`nhu sao bang
sao sao`crunch
sao sau`black-necked grackle starling
sao suc`nhu suc sao
sao tam`to dehydrate
sao thai`nhu sao
sao truyen`Telecopy
sao tua`(nhu) sao choi
sap`Sitting floor#oods stall#amboo pole dance#band, group, gang#to pile, to arrange, to set to keep ready#forthcoming, about to#prone#reverse#to collapse to bang shut#wax lipstick
sap bong`With one's back to the light
sap chu`to set types
sap dat`to organize, to arrange
sap hang`to line up, to stand in lines
sap mat`shifty, double-faced
sap ngua`head and tail
sap nhap`to merge, to intergrate
sap san`Get ready, prepare
sap sua`Be about to#Make preparations, make ready
sap sui`Intermittent
sap xep`to plan, to arrange (in some way)
sat`(particle of emphasis) [Nothing] at all#Cane brake (cay)#(dia phuong) Arrow#Crunch#Take off part of#ose all#hiz past#e very close to, adjoining#iron#firm#wrung with pain
sat cam`(tu cu) xem cam sat
sat canh`to stand work. side by side elbow to elbow
sat da`Iron and stone, iron
sat hach`o examine, to test
sat hai`to murder, to assassinate, to kill
sat hop`Appropriate
sat khi`murderous air look
sat khuan`Antiseptic
sat nach`Side by side, next-door
sat nghiep`to ruin, to collapse
sat nhan`murderous
sat nhap`xem sap nhap
sat phat`Be bent on winning at any costs (at a gambling table)
sat sanh`(dong vat) Long-horned grasshopper
sat sao`Close
sat sat`ery close
sat sinh`to slaughter, to butcher
sat son`constant
sat suon`Close to one, directly concerning (affecting) one
sat tay`tin
sat thep`Iron and steel
sat thuong`Anti-personal
sat trung`antiseptic
sat vun`Scap-iron
sau`(cay) dracontomelum#(ca) nhu ca sau#ehind, at the back of, hind, rear#ereinafter, below, following, as follows#insect, pest#decay#deep#profound#sound#sad, melancholy#six
sau benh`Pest, insect
sau bi`Sad
sau bo`Insect#cung nhu con trung
sau cay`bitter
sau chot`nhu sau rot
sau cung`After everyone, after everything,last
sau dam`Deepfelt, profound
sau dau`(dia phuong) China tree
sau day`In the near future#Hereinafter, below, following, as follows
sau do`after that
sau doc`fiendish, wicked
sau het`at the end, finally
sau hiem`Devilish
sau hoam`Very deep
sau kho`grievous, miserable
sau kin`deep (tinh cam)
sau lang`Profound, deep-lying
sau lung`a back of, behind one's back
sau mot`parasite
sau muoi`ixty
sau muon`moping
sau nang`Deep, deep-rooted
sau nao`Deeply sad, pervasively sad
sau nay`afterwards, later, in the future
sau nua`Moreover
sau quang`Phagedaena
sau rang`Dental caries
sau rieng`Durian
sau rom`caterpillar
sau rong`Wide and deep
sau rot`last
sau ruou`(thong tuc) Winebibber
sau sac`profound
sau sat`Having a deep understanding of, in very close touch with
sau sau`Sweet-gum tree
sau tham`Very profound, very deep#mournful, doleful
sau xa`Profound, deep; far-reaching
sau xua`Before and after, formely and in the future
say`(nhu rom) Prickly heat#drunk, intoxicated, high#sick, prostrate#(nhu) say me#reed#scratched#to dry#to lose
say chan`to take a false step; to trip
say dam`to dote on
say khuot`Be dead drunk
say mau`Be mad keen on
say me`to have a passion for
say mem`Be sozzled; be as drunk as a lord
say mieng`Make a slip of the tongue
say sat`abraded, scraped, scratched
say sua`be in the habit of#passionately deep#keep in
say tay`to drop ley attention
say thai`to miscarry
say toc`Dry one's hair (with a hair-drier)
say vay`(thong tuc) Take a lot of hard work
se`(Cay se) Stingly hot#(nhu) khe#will, shall, be going to#would, should#Hang down too low#Semen (cua ca)#be almost dry#be wrung with pain#farrowed#bamboo lattice basket#sparrow#to divide, to share#to hasy down#xem choi se
se biet`Will know what one is in for
se hay`will see
se long`Have one's heart wrung with pain
se minh`Feel out of sorts, feel under the weather
se moi`Have dry lips
se ne`lumberly
se sang`nhu khe khang 
se se`Nearly level to th ground#nhu se se#xem se (lay)#xem se (lay)
sec`cheque
sem`inged, burned, burnt#layer of burned rice
sen`(thuc vat) Bassia#Stingy#lotus hoa sen#snail terrestrial leech
sen dam`Gendarme
sen set`xem set (lay)
sen so`Stingy, miserly
senh`Castanets#unwatchful, neglectful
senh ra`Neglect, not pay proper attention
senh tay`to show a little negligence
senh tien`Castanets with coins stringed
seo`Arched quill-feather (of a cock). xem xeo#scar node
sep`(tu cu) Boss#xem xep
set`thunderbolt, bolt agril, clay#rust#strike measured, struck#very thick
seu`Present the fiancee's family with gifts on festivities#crane
seu tet`nhu seu
si`Feudal scholar, feudal intellectual, feudal intelligentsia#ishop (a chess piece)#benjamine fig#by wholesale#very, excessively, extremely#xem xi 
si dien`face
si hoan`(tu cu) Mandarin#andarinate, mandarindom
si khi`(tu cu) Scholar's sense of honour, scholar's probity#oldier's fighting spirit
si lam`(tu cu) Literati
si me`Crazy; head over heels (in love)
si ngoc`(it dung) Stupid
si nhuc`to play (someone) down, to dishonour#ignominous, ignoble; dishourable
si phu`feudal intellectual
si quan`officer
si si`xem si (lay)
si so`number of pupils, number of attendants
si sup`Make many genuflexions
si sut`Sob
si thu`(tu cu) Common people and intellectuals
si tinh`to be madly in love with someone
si tot`man, the ranks
si tu`(cu) candidate
sia`Flat wide-meshed basket#Pregnant woman's oedma of the legs.#thuong sia chan) Slip, stumble
sich`to stir (move suddenly) to happen suddenly
siem ninh`to fawn upon
sien`nhu suyen Suffer from asthma
sieng`(tu cu) Wood-bottomed hamper#diligent
sieng nang`diligent, assiduous
siet`to cut off, to slash off to squeeze, to wring, to fasten
sieu`herbsimmering pot curved-tipped scimitar
sieu am`ultra-sound#ultrasonic
sieu cam giac`(triet hoc) Suprasensible
sieu cau truc`(sinh vat) Ultrastructure
sieu cuong`superpower
sieu dan`(vat ly) Supraconductor
sieu dang`super
sieu de quoc`Superimperialism
sieu do`Free (souls) from suffering (theo quan niem dao Phat)
sieu giai cap`Above the classes, outside the classes
sieu han`(toan hoc) Transfinite
sieu hien thuc`Surrealist
sieu hien vi`Ultramicroscopic
sieu nhan`superman
sieu nhien`supernatural
sieu pham`superordinary
sieu phan ung`Superreaction
sieu quan`Superordinary, unusual
sieu quoc gia`Supernational
sieu sinh`Sieu sinh tinh do to depart from this life and reach serene and pure land
sieu thanh`supersonic
sieu thi`Supermarket
sieu thoat`Go beyong usual practices
sieu thuc`Surrealist
sieu tu nhien`supernatural
sieu vi khuan`(tu cu) Virus
sieu viet`Transcendent
sim`Tomentose rose myrtle@sin#toan hoc) Sine
sin sit`xem sit (lay)
sinh`Grow up gradually#danh tu, tinh tu mud; marshy, muddy#to swell, to distend#to be very fond of, to like very much#to give birth to to produce, yield to turn#life; living; alive
sinh ba`Tre sinh ba#riplets
sinh benh hoc`(y hoc) Pathogeny
sinh binh`Lifetime
sinh de`Bear children
sinh dia`(duoc) Rhemannia raw shizome
sinh do`(tu cu) Junior bachelor#upil, student
sinh doi`twin, twin born
sinh dong`lifeslike, vivid lively
sinh duc`reproduction
sinh duong`to give birth to and bring up#vegetative
sinh gioi`Living nature; living creatures
sinh ha`to give birth to
sinh han`Refrigerating
sinh hoa hoc`biochemistry
sinh hoat`life, living activities
sinh hoat phi`Subsistence fee
sinh hoc`biology
sinh ke`means of living, livelihood
sinh khi`vatality, vital force
sinh khoi`Living mass; mass of living organisms
sinh khuong`(duoc) Fresh ginger
sinh lay`marshy, swampy
sinh le`Wedding presents (from bridegroom to bride)
sinh linh`(tu cu) People#acred human life
sinh loi`Produce wealth; produce profits; be productive, be lucrative
sinh luc`vitality, sap
sinh ly`hysiology, physiological
sinh ly hoc`physiology
sinh menh`life
sinh nghi`(tu cu) nhu sinh le
sinh ngu`Living language
sinh nhai`Ke sinh nhai#ivelihood
sinh nhat`birthday
sinh nhiet`(vat ly) Pyrogenetic
sinh no`Be delivered
sinh phan`Pre-death tomb
sinh quan`birth place
sinh quyen`Biosphere
sinh ra`to turn, to become
sinh sac`more beautiful chromogenous, chromogenic
sinh san`to produce, to reproduce, to genserate, to beget
sinh sich`xem sich
sinh soi`(sinh vat) Sinh soi nay no#o multiply
sinh song`to live, to earn for living
sinh su`to make troubles, to cause a quarrel#quarrelsome
sinh thai`Ecological
sinh thai hoc`ecology
sinh thanh`Give birth and a settled position to
sinh thiet`(y hoc) Biopsy
sinh thoi`lifetime
sinh thu`(tu cu) Pleasures of life
sinh thuc`(sinh vat, cu) Reproduction
sinh tien`During one's lifetime
sinh to`vitamin
sinh ton`danh tu, dong tu exixtence; to exist
sinh tong hop`(sinh vat) Biosynthesis
sinh truong`to grow, to be born and bred
sinh tu`Living mandarin's temple#Tre sinh tu#uadruplets#life and death
sinh vat`living thing, creature
sinh vat hoc`biology
sinh vien`student
sit`Of a dull black; livid#niff#very close
sit sao`close-knit
sit sit`(khau ngu) Very very close
so`Coarse gauze#Insolent, impertinent, saucy#[Slaughtered animal] head. So lon A pig's head#arca#bulky#cursory paltry, indifferent not intinate, distant#destiny, fate, lot number, size sum, amount gear worm gear#petition to the king#service office#skull#to compare; to pair (ddu~a)#first-born con so first-born child#to fear, to be afraid#to touch, to feel#vertical stroke register, book#to cross, to cross out to escape to undo, to spilt to be overgrown
so bi`to compare enviously, to be envious
so bi chia`dividend
so bi nhan`(toan hoc) Multiplicant
so bo`preliminary
so cai`(ke toan) Leger
so cao`First draft
so cap`danh tu, tinh tu primary
so cau`wish, aspiration
so cay`Rely on
so che`subject (something) to preliminary treatment
so chi`(ke toan) Book of charges
so chia`divisor
so co la`hocolate
so cu`Base oneself on#round; foundation
so cuu`First aid
so dac`One's line, what is much of one's line, one's knowledge (of some subject...)
so dang`Primary, elementary, basic
so day`(am nhac) Tune (a strong instrument)
so de`Last two numbers of the first prize (in the National lottery)
so den`Bad luck; ill luck; misfortune#Black list
so di`If, that is why
so dien`(tu cu) Census-record
so do`Compare the advantages and disadvantaes (of something)#Compare things enviously#Good luck, luck; fortune#Measurement#outline, diagram
so doan`weakness, weak point, foible
so doi`(ke toan) Surplus; excedent
so dong`majority
so du`(toan hoc) Remainder.#ke toan) Balance
so dua`Pair chopsticks#coconut shell
so gai`Coarse gauze and linen (with which to make mourning clothes)
so gian`(it dung) Summary, brief
so giao`newly acquainted
so hai`to be frightened
so hang`term
so hieu`Number sign
so ho`weak spot, weakness
so ho khau`Family-register
so hoc`(tu cu) Elementary education#arithmetics
so hu`(toan hoc) Abstract number
so huu`to own, to hold
so huu ti`(toan hoc) Rational number
so it`(ngon ngu) Singular#inority
so ke`Be meanly particular about money, be niggardly (near) about money#nequal, not of the same length
so ket`Sum up partially, make a preliminary summing-up of a discussion
so khai`beginning, at a start
so khanh`unfaithful lover
so khao`primery examination
so kho`Warehouse-book
so khong`Zero, nought
so kien`(tu cu) First interview#What one knows; what one has seen
so kiep`Destiny, fate, lot
so la`Owing to the fact that
so le`unequal, rough alternate
so liet`(toan hoc) Series of numbers
so lieu`data
so lon`The greatest part; the majority
so long`Just delivered#to escape to break away, to be let out#to fluff
so luoc`cursory, sketchy
so luong`Pay-book#quantity, amount
so mau`(ly, hoa hoc) Colourimetric
so menh`Fate, destiny, lot
so mi`shirt
so mo`to touch
so mot`number one#first, overall
so mu`(toan hoc) Exponent
so muc`List
so mui`Have a running nose
so nan`Palpate
so ngo`(tu cu) First meeting
so nguyen`wish
so nguyen to`(toan hoc) Prime number
so nhan`Multiplier
so nhat ky`Diary
so nhiem`(y hoc) Primary infection
so nhieu`(ngon ngu) Plural
so pham`First infraction, first violation#ommitted for the first time
so phan`Destiny, fate, lot
so phuc`(toan hoc) Complex number
so quan`Interested, concerned
so quy`Cask-book
so sach`books, records
so sai`Cursory, without care#parse, spare
so sam`nhu so soang
so sang`insolent, saucy, impertinent
so sanh`to compare
so se`Full-bodied and slovenly
so set`Be afraid, fear
so sia`(it dung) Summary
so sinh`new-born
so so`obvious, conspicuous#xem so (lay)#xem so (lay)
so soang`Grope for#uddle (a woman); touch (somebody) up
so sot`(it dung) nhu sai sot
so suat`negligent, careless
so tai`local, resident
so tan`to evacuate
so tay`notebook
so thai`(y hoc) Expulsion of foetus
so tham`to hear and try first case
so thanh`Result
so thao`Draft roughly
so thich`like, liking, taste
so thu`(ke toan) Book of receipts#the zoo
so thu chi`(ke toan) Receipts and expenses register
so tiet kiem`Savings-book
so toet`(thong tuc) Cross, reject
so truong`strong point, forte
so tu vi`horoscope
so tuyen`Preliminary selection
so uoc`(it dung) One's wish, one's aspiration
so vang`Golden book
so vanh`hauvinistic, chauvinist
so vo ti`Irrational number
so vong`(tu cu) Wish
so y`negligent, inattentive
soan`to prepare; to compose; to compile to sort out
soan doat`(nhu) phan doat
soan gia`author, compiler
soan sua`(it dung) nhu sua soan
soan thao`to compile
soat`Sound of tearing (paper, cloth), rustling (of materials...)#to check
soat ve`Check (bus, train) tickets
soat xet`Check, control, examine
soc`(y hoc) Shock#danh tu stripe#quirrel
soi`(thuc vat) Tallow-tree#Arena#Barren, sterile (of female animals)#floss, floss silk oak#intelligibly speaking fluent#measles#olf#ald#pebble, gravel#experienced; efficient#thread fibre#to boil to rumble#boiled#to flash, to luminate
soi bong`Reflect
soi doi`Wordly-wise
soi dong`Effervescent
soi gan`foam with rage
soi mau`(thong tuc) nhu soi gan
soi noi`ebullient; exciting
soi phan`(y hoc) Coprolite
soi roi`Light up; shed light on; enlighten
soi ruot`(y hoc) Enterolite
soi sang`Shed light on, enlighten
soi suc`to seethe, to boil
soi tiet`Be in the height of passion, boil over with rage
soi xet`to examine, to consider
som`decrepit
som chieu`All day long
som hom`morning and evening
som khuya`Day and night
som mai`early morning tomorrow morning
som muon`Sooner or later
som nguoi`Get older than one's age
som sem`Decrepit, emacitated#ld and toothless
som so`Use too familiar a language (with a woman)
som som`xem som (lay)#xem som (lay)
som sua`Earlier than usual
son`ochre vermilion, Chinese vermilion lipstick#young#paint wax-tree#to paint#to creep, to stand on end#torn, threadbare#to lose heart
son ca`nightingale
son chi`nhu son long
son coc`ale, ravine
son cuoc`Mountain area
son da`Out-of-the-way area
son dau`oil-paint
son duong`chamois
son gay`(khau ngu) make one's hair stand on end
son ha`Mountain and river.#tu cu) Land, country
son hao`game delicacy
son he`Mountain system, mountain range
son khe`ravine and mountain mountain area
son lam`Mountain and forest, greenwood
son long`to lose heart
son mach`Mountain, chain
son mai`lacquer
son mon`Mountain pagoda#buxom, plump
son nhan`mountainer, hermit
son phan`Lipstick and powder; consmetics
son phao`Mountain artillery
son roi`Still childless (noi ve dan ba)
son sac`(dia phuong) Hasty and bewildered
son sat`unshakably loyal, faithful
son se`Still childless (noi ve nguoi vo)#nhu thon tha 
son so`Light-hearted
son son`De son son#middle-aged
son sot`crunchingly
son than`mountain god
son then`Black lacquer
son thuy`natural scenery, landscape
son tinh`Mountain Genie
son tra`(thuc vat) Camellia
son trai`(tu cu) Mountain camp
son trang`Mountain farm#Woodman
son tre`young and vigorous
son van hoc`Orography
son xi`Spray-paint
son xuyen`River and canal
song`Dyer's brown bark#ave#o shake out even#ridge, spine, back#to live#alive#raw rare#river#straighforward, unequivocal#to escape, to break loose#window rattan#ut, however
song Ngan`The Milky Way
song am`Drink tea in one another's company#ake enough tea for two
song am tiet`(ngon ngu) nhu song tiet
song bac`casino
song ban vi`(kinh te) Bimetallism
song ca`Sing a duet
song cai`River (discharging into the sea)
song chet`life and death#at all costs
song con`Tributary, little stream#to exist#vital
song cong`(ky thuat) Duplex
song cuc`Bipolar
song dai`(thuc vat) Perennial
song dao`Canal, channel
song de`(triet hoc) Dilemma
song dong`Lively
song duong`(tu cu) Parents
song gio`ind and waves#ps and downs, troubles
song hanh`to go abreast
song hi`dual happiness, double joy
song ho`Paper-pasted window
song kiem`Couple of swords
song lai`Rise [again] from the dead resurrect (it dung), come to life again#elive
song loan`(tu cu) Two-carrier palanquin
song lung`Spine, backbone
song ma`xe song ma two horsed carriage
song mai`Male bird and female bird, cock and hen#o a finish
song mang`(dia phuong) nhu song dao
song mieng`Let out secrets while speaking, spill the beans while speaking
song mom`nhu song mieng
song ngoi`rivers and streams
song ngu`(ngon ngu) Bilingual
song nhan`Not done at all#thong tuc) Be alive and kicking
song nui`rivers and mountains land, country
song nuoc`Waterways
song phang`always in due fair; straightforward and impartial
song phi`Da song phi#o kick with two feet at the same time, to give a double kick
song phuong`bilateral
song sa`(tu cu) Silk-curtained window
song sanh`o shake
song senh`Unwatched, left unattended
song sit`raw, uripe undone
song soc`Flashing angry glares#ubling
song song`parallel
song sot`to survive
song suong`brazen, impudent
song suot`t full length
song thac`Live or die
song than`Large-threaded vermicelli#parents
song that luc bat`Seven-seven-six-eight word meter
song the`(tu cu) Bigamy
song thi`(y hoc) Diplopia
song thua`useless to society, good for nothing
song tieu`(vat ly) Bifocal
song toan`both complete
song trau`hog's back
song trung`(hiem gap) Double
song tu diep`(thuc vat) Dicotyledon
song tuyen`nhu song toan
sooc`horts
soong`xem xoong
sop`swell, luxurious open-handed, generous
sot`basket, cylindrical crate#fever, temperature#steaming hot#to remain to omit, to miss out#to share, to pour to divide
sot con`nhu sot ret
sot deo`hot
sot gan`Be angry and anxious
sot giay`Waste-paper basket
sot nhau`(y hoc) Placental retention
sot rac`Dustbin; (My) garbage can, trash-can
sot ret`malaria
sot ruot`impatient, anxious
sot sang`zealous, whole-hearted
sot soat`rustling#rustle
sot sot`At once#nhu son sot
sot vo`harassed
sot xuat huyet`Petechial fever
stand`acket#o cost
stick`lear; quiet#lim
su`cay) aegiceras#o mix up, to mix together#china, porcelain envoy, ambassader#cu) French resident#deed, act, action event, occurrence#history#much, very, whoppingly#uddhist priest, bonze#su doan) division
su ba`Elderly female bonze
su bac`Intermediate - ranking bonze
su co`(it dung) nhu ni co#break-down
su cu`high-ranking bonze
su de`teacher and disciple
su doan`Division#diplomatic corps
su doan truong`Division commander
su dung`to use, to utilize, to employ
su gia`historian#king's envoy ambassador
su hao`kohlrabi
su hoc`history
su huu`(it dung) Teacher and friend
su huynh`fellow
su kien`event
su ky`istory
su luoc`historical summary
su menh`mission
su mo`Bonzedom
su nghiep`work, cause, career
su nu`Female bonze, Buddhist nun
su ong`Bonzedom
su pham`pedagogy, pedagogics
su pho`king's tutor
su phu`(cu) master
su quan`embassy
su sach`books of history and legends
su sai`Bonzes
su se`Yellow-coloured rice cake
su sinh`Teacher and pupil
su su`chayote#xem su (lay)#eep and persistent (cough)
su thay`Middle-ranking female bonze
su the`gist#situation
su thuc`One's teacher younger brother#fact truth
su tich`story, history
su truong`master, mastermind division commander
su tu`lion
su vat`thing
su viec`fact
sua`(cho) to bark#jelly-fish#milk#to repair to correct, to put right
sua chua`to repair, to correct
sua doi`to modify, to reform
sua sang`t o reform, to redecorate
sua soan`to prepare, to make ready
suat`ration, portion rate modulus
suc`og#ig roll#o rinse#strength, power, force#to scour to plunge deep into
suc ep`pressure
suc khoe`strength health
suc luc`strength, force
suc manh`power, strength
suc nang`weight
suc nuc`to give forth, to spread wide
suc sac`ice
suc sao`to scour, to search
suc sinh`omestic animal#ad
suc song`vitality
suc tich`oncise, terse
suc vat`nimal
suc voc`endurance, strength
sui`(cay) antiar#badly#to swell with pustules to froth, to foam
sui bot`to bubble up
sui cao`Ravioli soup
sui sut`melting in tears lasting,long lasting, continual
sui tam`Bubble, sparkle (of wine)
sum`to collapse, to fall over
sum hop`to unite, to come together
sum se`luxuriant
sum soa`Grow rank, be rampant
sum sup`xem sup (lay)
sum vay`to gather, to live together
sun`Shrink#un vai#o shrink one's shoulders#cartilage#rang) decayed
sung`Drip (with water)#ater-lily#un#fig, cluster fig#horn#standing still, motionless#stunned, stupefied, dumbfounded#to revere, to believe in#to swell
sung ai`(cu) to favour, to treat as a favourite#(tu cu) Love as a favourite, treat as a favourite
sung bai`to revere, to worship
sung cao su`atapult
sung chuc`Be appointed to an office (post)
sung co`to have one's hackles up
sung coi`ortar
sung cong`to confiscate
sung dao`devout, religious
sung hup`considerably swell
sung huyet`to congest
sung kinh`to revere
sung luc`evolver
sung man`affluent, abundant
sung mo`(tu cu) Hold in high esteem
sung ngan`istol
sung ngoai`Xenophile
sung phung`(tu cu) Workship
sung quan`(tu cu) Be exiled and made a border guard
sung so`astonished, stupefied, transfixed#truculent, reckless
sung sot`to be amazed
sung suc`Boil away noisily#ubble over seethe#in good form, fully fit
sung suong`tinh tu happy
sung than`(tu cu) Favourite (of a king)
sung thuong`(tu cu) Honour
sung tin`Believe fervently (piously) in
sung truong`ifle
sung tuc`well-to-do
suoi`spring#to warm oneself
suoi nang`o sunbathe, to warm oneself in the sun
suoi vang`styx, stygian shores
suon`Side of man's chest, side#rame#lan#straight and tall fluent, flowing
suon se`flowing, smooth
suon suot`Sprawling lazily
suong`crunchy immature#to feel slightly ashamed, to feel uneasy#dew#happy, elated#plain, meatless bright and quiet empty
suong gia`frost
suong mat`spectacular, fine, fair#to feel awkward
suong mu`mist, fog
suong muoi`Hoarfrost
suong sa`too familiar, natural, freely
suong suong`xem suong (lay)
suong tinh`(thong tuc) Come back empty-handed
suot`bobbin, cop#hrough, throughout all, always#to graze to scratch slightly
suot doi`all one's life
suot luot`All in turn
sup`to collapse, to tumble
sup de`oiler
sup do`to collapse, to tumble, to fall down to crumble
sup lay`Tumble down in a genuflexion, kowtow
sut`chipped#o slip#o split#o shoot, to make a shot (da_banh)#o lose weight#o decline, to reduce#to tumble, to collapse to go down, to drop, to fall, to decrease
sut gia`Devaluate
sut kem to`eteriorate, to decline
sut lo`Fall in
sut lun`(dia ly) Depression
sut moi`having a harelip
sut nguoi`Lose flesh, lose strength
sut sit`xem sit
sut sui`nhu sui sut. Continual and lasting
sut the`(dien) Fall of potential
suu tam`to collect, to search for
suu tap`to collect#collection
suu thue`taxes and fees
suy`to decline to consider,to ponder over, to think carfully
suy bai`Decadent
suy bi`Compare with envy
suy bien`to degrade
suy cu`(tu cu) Elect
suy di`(cu) to deteriorate, to decline
suy dien`to deduce, to infer
suy dinh duong`(y hoc) Malnutrition
suy doan`Guess, deduce by guess
suy doi`depraved
suy don`Be worse off
suy giam`Decline, decrease
suy luan`to deduce
suy ly`o vason
suy mon`(y hoc) Consumptive#achexy
suy ngam`nhu ngam nghi
suy nghi`to think
suy nhuoc`weakening, asthenic
suy rong`Generalize
suy rong ra`to generalize
suy sup`Decline
suy sut`Deteriorate, grow worse
suy suyen`Be harmed#to be harmed, damaged
suy tan`decay, declination
suy thoai`retrograde
suy ti`Be envious envy
suy tim`(y hoc) Heart failure
suy tinh`Calculate
suy ton`Worsen, decline#to honour, to proclaim
suy tu`Meditate#editation
suy tuong`Consider carefully
suy vi`Weaken, grow weaker
suy vong`Decline, fall into decadence
suy xet`to consider, to think out
suy yeu`to weaken, to decline
suyen`asthma
suyt`o be about to, to be on the point of
suyt nua`lmost, nearly
suyt soat`lmost, alike, approximate
ta`, me, my#cholera#to describe, to picture#left, leftist#dozen#evil spirit#to decline#nappy, napkin;#My) diaper#quintal (100kg). weight#to thank
ta chan`realistic
ta dam`obscene, inlecent
ta dao`heresy, heterdoxy
ta dien`tenant, tenant farmer
ta duoc`excipient
ta duong`sunset, sundown
ta khi`miasma
ta khuynh`leftist deviationistic
ta ly`cu) minor official of a ministry
ta ma`evil spirits
ta ngan`left bank
ta tam`ill will, evil intention
ta than`to complain, to moan
ta the`to pass away
ta thuat`voodoo, hocus pocus
ta thuc`realistic
ta thuyet`heterodoxy
ta toi`ragged. to shreds
ta trang`duodenum
ta vet`sleeper
tac`choked up, blocked up#to click (one's tongue)#one tenth metre#to carve. to engrave on (upon), to cherish
tac da`to cherish
tac dan`hand-granade
tac dong`to act upon (on), to influence, to have an effect on (upon)
tac dung`action, effect
tac gia`author
tac hai`harm, damage#to damage, to give damages to
tac ke`gecko
tac loan`to cause disturbances, to cause disorder
tac long`man's heart
tac nghen`jammed, blocked
tac nhan`agent
tac pham`work, piece of..
tac phong`style of work, manners
tac phuc`to bestow faverurs, to do good
tac quai`to behave perversely
tac thanh`to support to an aim
tac trach`perfunctory
tac xi`axi, cab
tach`clatter, light crack#cup#to separate, to split#with a light crack (tick)
tach bach`clear cut
tai`ear. mishap, accident, calamity#to box the ears of#rare, half done. pale#talent, gift#skilful, talented#to spread chin#transport, convey, to carry. to manage
tai ac`mischievously malicious
tai ach`disaster
tai ban`to reprint
tai bien`catactrophe
tai but`postscript
tai can`ability, capability
tai chinh`finance. family budget
tai cho`on the spot, right away
tai chuc`in office, incumbent. in service
tai cong`danh tu (dia phuong). steersman, helmsman
tai cu`to revelect
tai dao`(cu) at large
tai dien`happen again, to re-occur
tai duc`talent and virtue
tai gia`at home#to remarry
tai giam`to reduce
tai gioi`gifted
tai hai`disastrous, catastrophic
tai hoa`disaster, catastrophe#refined talent, exquisite talent
tai hoi`to return again
tai hop`to reunite
tai khoa`fiscal year
tai khoan`account
tai lieu`material, document
tai luc`capability, capacity
tai mao`talent and outward look
tai nan`accident
tai nang`talent, efficiency
tai nghe`artistic talent, art
tai ngu`on active service#to re-engage, to re-enlist
tai nguyen`resources
tai pham`to relapse, to commit again
tai phat`to recur
tai phiet`financial oligarchy
tai quai`mischievously wiched
tai sac`talent and beauty
tai san`property
tai san xuat`to reproduce
tai sao`why, the reason why
tai sinh`to have rebirth. to regenerate
tai tam`in one's heart
tai tao`to re-create, to recycle. to establish again
tai the`second-life, rebirth
tai tieng`bad name (reputation), whispers
tai tinh`very skilful, very artistic
tai tri`ability and intellect
tai tu`amateur. actor, actress.#cu) talented men
tai uong`great disaster
tai vi`as, for, because
tai vu`finance
tai xe`driver, chauffeur
tai xiu`Chinese dice
tam`broken rice piece, length#bubble. trace. toothpick#man's good heart mind center, heart#range, scope, reach degree, extent#coi tam) siren#silkworm#temporary. as a makeshift#three#to have a bath; to bathe#to soak
tam ban`sampan
tam bay`perverse, wrong
tam be`childhood
tam biet`to part, to say goodbye. goodbye, bye-bye, bye
tam bo`to feed up#unsettled, by makeshift
tam can`one's intermost heart
tam cap`perron
tam dac`to understand thoroughly, to sympathize fully#favourite
tam dai`three generations
tam dia`(xau) mind
tam diem`freemason
tam doan luan`syllogism
tam giac`danh tu, tinh tu. triangle, triangular. triangle
tam giao`intimate#three religions
tam giat`to take a bath and wash
tam gui`loranth
tam hoi`news (about someone)
tam hon`soul
tam linh`spirit, spyche
tam ly`sychology, memntal process
tam ly hoc`sychology
tam muoi`ighty
tam na`to hunt for, to search for
tam nang`to take a sunbath, to sunbathe
tam nao`psyche
tam nhi`auriche
tam phao`idle, unrealistic
tam phuc`very reliable
tam quat`to massage
tam rua`to have a wash, to bathe
tam su`confidence
tam suat`qui tac tam suat the rule of three
tam ta`pouring#pouringly, heavily
tam than`mind, mental
tam thanh`sincerity
tam that`false ginseng#ventricle
tam the`tricolour
tam thoi`provisional
tam thuong`commonplace, mediocre
tam tich`trace
tam tinh`confidence, feelings#personal character
tam toc`three lines of ancestry
tam tong`three follow's
tam trang`mood
tam tri`heart and mind
tam tru`to stay provisionally
tam tu`innermost feelings
tam ung`advance payment
tam uoc`modus vivendi
tam voc`stature
tam vong`nulgar bamboo
tam xich`walking stick
tam xuan`briar, dog-rose, eglantine
tan`ash. processional parasol#to crumble, to draw to an end, to decay#dying, waning#ending, finished#s far as, to, right to#halo#to crush, to grind. to wheedle, to blandish. to court. to gossip, to chat#standing position (in Kung Fu) ton, metric ton play#to dissolve, to melt, to thaw. into pieces. to be over, to close, to disperse
tan ac`wicked, ruthless
tan bao`fiendish, cruel
tan binh`defeated troops, remains#new soldier, new recruit
tan bo`to stroll, to amble
tan cong`to attack, to assault
tan cu`to evacuate, to disperse
tan cung`terminal
tan du`vestige
tan dung`to make use of
tan hai`to devastate
tan hieu`thoroughly dutiful
tan hoang`devastated
tan hon`nuptial#marriage
tan huong`freckles#to enjoy fully, to make the most of
tan khach`guests
tan khoc`devastating, destructive
tan ky`ew fangled
tan lang`(cu) newly, married man
tan loan`helter skelter
tan luc`to try one's best
tan lui`to wither, to become doued up
tan man`patiently attentive, careful#scattered, dispersed
tan mat`scattered about, mislaid
tan nat`in pieces, in mins
tan ngan`stunned and at a loss
tan ngu`object
tan nhan`heartless, ruthless
tan nhang`(xem) tan huong 
tan pha`do devastate, to ravage
tan phe`dissable, invalid
tan phong`to consecrate
tan ra`to disintegrate, to separate
tan sat`to massacre, to murder, to slaughter
tan so`frequency
tan ta`to go to seed, to wither up (away)
tan tam`whole-hearted
tan tao`(cung viet: tao tan) contriving well
tan tat`crippled
tan te`withless and ungrateful
tan thanh`to agree to, to approve
tan the`the end of the world
tan thoi`mordern, fashionable
tan thuong`to appreciate
tan tich`vestiges
tan tien`slinging, very shrifly#trendy
tan tinh`to wheedle. to court, to flirt#whole-hearted
tan trao`new trend, new movement
tan tung`to sing the praise of
tan tuy`devoted
tan van`(cu) pro
tan vo`shattered, smashed
tan xuan`early spring
tang`buddhist monk tank#to increase#innards, inner parts, viscera. constitution#mourning, death. funeral#slab, block#story, floor layer, stratum, seam altitude#to present, to give
tang boc`to appraise, to extol to the skies
tang che`mourning and funeral rituals
tang chung`evidence, proof
tang cuong`to strengthen
tang hinh`to disappear, to hide oneself
tang le`funeral, burial rites
tang lo`to turn away from, to ignore, to neglect
tang lop`section, segment
tang lu`clergy
tang ni`Buddhist monks and nuns
tang pham`present
tang phu`viscera
tang phuc`mourning
tang sang`dawn, early morning
tang tang`slightly mad. tipsy
tang thuong`shably, miserable#to award
tang tich`evidence
tang tiu`to have an affair
tang to`great-grandparent
tang toc`death and grief
tang ton`great-grandchild
tang tru`to keep, to store
tang vat`exhibit, proof
tanh`(dia phuong) nhu tinh#tire-hoop#fishy, stinking#utterly, absolutely#to stop (raining)
tanh banh`topsy-turvy
tanh hoi`stinking
tanh rao`to get dry
tao`I, me#time. rope strand#alga#to manage leaf one's wits#apple#(tao ta) jujube, jujubetree, Chinese date.#tao tay) apple, apple-tree#to create, to make, to form, to cause
tao bao`reckless, daring
tao dan`literary coterie
tao gan`overbold, daring
tao giao`o cross
tao hinh`tinh tu. plastic
tao hoa`the creator
tao lao`futile, frivolous, idle
tao lap`to establish, to set up
tao ngo`to meet, to encounter#to weed a grave
tao nha`refined
tao thanh`to make up, to create. to form, to establish#to mop up
tap`poor, miscellaneous#set section booklet volume#to drill, to excercise oneself, to try to to cultivate, to accustom#to snap. to lap
tap chat`extraneous matter
tap chi`magazine, digest
tap doan`group, clique, community, corporation
tap hau`to attrack in arear
tap hop`to assemble, to group up, to gather
tap huan`to drill, to coach
tap ket`to gather, to assemble
tap kich`to attack by surprise
tap ky`ariety, vaudeville (My)
tap luc`iscellany
tap luyen`to train, to practise
tap nap`in great number, in a rush
tap nhap`trifling
tap quan`habit
tap san`review, magazine
tap su`on probation
tap tanh`to train, to be used with, to be accustomed to; to make acquaintance to
tap the`collective, common, team#community, team
tap trung`to concentrate, to focus(on), to mass(up)
tap tuc`customs and habits
tap vu`odd job
tat`danh tu, pho tu all, whole#hen surely, of course#infirmity habit disease, illness#to die out, to be out, to be extinct to extinguish, to put out to switch off, to turn off#short#to drop in. to turn. to splash into. to lash against, to whip on (upon)#to slap. to scoop (water). to bail out of (a boat)
tat benh`disease, illness
tat ca`all, whole, as a whole
tat hoi`(xem) tat_nghi, tat_tho
tat kinh`to stop (cease menses)
tat nhien`inevitably, naturally, ofcouse
tat ta`in a hurry, hastily
tat tai`to box the ears of, to slap
tat tho`to breathe one's last
tat yeu`indispensable
tau`opium pipe tobacco pipe#to flee, to run away to hide#ship, boat, craft. junk stable#(cu) Chinese#to address to tell tale#to buy, to purchase
tau chien`warship
tau cho`slow train
tau cuoc`dredger
tau hoa`train
tau ma`galloping
tau ngam`submarine
tau san bay`aircraft carrier
tau tan`to disperse and hide
tau thoat`to flee, to run away
tau thuy`ship, boat
tay`blunt-edged#to compare, to match.h#hand#arm#person, chap, bloke#person engaged in some trade#party, side#to fester to make a chance packet#to wipe out, to wipe off, to rub out (off)#India-rubber#to boycott to purge#west#French#estern personal, private
tay ao`sleeve
tay bac`orth-west
tay chay`to boycott
tay cung`west palace; Royal gynaeceum
tay dinh`fiendich, heinous
tay hoc`western study
tay lai`sturing wheel, helm
tay may`to twiddle with, to toy with. to thieve, to steal trivial things
tay nai`cloth bag
tay nam`danh tu, tinh tu south west
tay nao`brain-wash
tay ngang`amateur
tay phuong`Western
tay quay`crank
tay sai`agent, hireling, lackey
tay tho`skilled warkman
tay trang`danh tu, tt. bare hands, bare-handed
tay tren`by stealing a march on somebodytealing a march on somebody
tay troi`heinous, very serious
tay trong`fifth columnist, assistant from within
tay tru`to uproot, to wipe out
tay vin`handrail
te`(gao te) ordinary rice, plain rice#uninteresting, dull uncronded#(te te) swiftly, fast#(thuoc te) pills#evil, social evil#bad, poor heartless mighty#numbed, insensible, stiff#to fall, to fell over#to run (ride at full gallop) to sacrifice, to worship#to shell#to wee, to wee-wee, to do a wee-wee
te bac`ungrateful
te bai`aralyse
te bao`cell
te bao chat`cytoplasm
te do`to save, to bless
te doan`social evil, corrupt practices
te giac`rhinoceros
te hai`bad, deplorable
te me`dead to the world
te nhi`subtle, stricky
te ra`to turn out to be
te te`pangolin
te thap`rheumatism
te the`to help the world
te tuc`bad custom
te tuu`to gather, be all present
te xa`my humble abode
tech`wattle, caruncle
tem`stamp#to make a quid of#to tidy up, to arrange
tem phieu`coupons
tem tep`with smacks
ten`arrow name chap,bloke#verdgris
ten goi`name
ten hieu`danh tu alias
ten lua`rocket, missile
ten thanh`christian name
ten tuc`birth name
teng beng`tattered, torn open
tenh`revy
teo`tiny bit, wee bit#to shrink extremely, utterly
tep`tiny shirmp fry succulent cell#tiny, small-sized
tet`New Year's Day, Tet festival#To the Vietnamese people, Tet Nguyen Dan (Lunar New Year's Day) is very sacred. The Tet season usually falls on either the second half of the first calendar month, or the early days of the second calendar month of the year. This is the time when family members together make food, fruit and incense offerings on the family altars to commemorate their ancestors. This is also the time for people to visit their neighbours, their friends and relatives. During the first three or four days of Tet, any visitor who is the first visitor to one's house to offer Tet greetings would be considered as the first visitor for the year (Xong dat). Their good or bad luck would have a strong effect on the house owner's business success for the coming year. The belief of Xong dat remains very strong nowadays, especially among business people. Tet days are always regarded as a perfect time for people to enjoy traditional food such as banh chung, a square-shaped sticky rice cake, the fragrance of which alone could strongly provoke one's sense of nostalgia for Tet#WHAT TET MEANS FOR HANOIAN CHRISTIANS Ha Noi (originally called Thang Long) was an early site for the propagation of Christianity. Phan Phat Huon, author of "Viet Nam Giao Su" Vol.1 (A History of Religion in Vietnam), writes that in 1581, a missionary named De Pesaro wrote a letter and sent pictures depicting the history of Christianity to Mac Mau Hop (the then ruler of Thang Long). In 1584, another missionary, Bartholomew Ruiz of the Franciscan Order from Manila, came with an interpreter to Northern Vietnam (then called Tonkin) and Thang Long. He was warmly received by Mac Mau Hop and allowed to hold his services and ceremonies. In 1626, Father Baldinoti arrived in Thang Long and was greeted by Trinh Trang, the then Lord of the North. He was also granted permission to hold services for the public. This put the Christian faith in Vietnam well on its way. A real landmark came in 1627, when missionary Alexandre de Rhodes came to Ha Noi on July 2 after Lord Trinh Trang returned from his expedition to the South. This event effected a marked change in the propagation of Christianity in Northern Vietnam. From just a wooden hut provided by Trinh Trang, Rhodes set up a small prayer-hall to preach his faith and by the end of 1627, he had baptised over 1,200 people. In 1628, another ,000 were baptised, with this number growing to 3,500 in 1629. At the same time, Rhodes romanised the Vietnamese language in order to further facilitate the spread of Christianity. He also wrote a book in Vietnamese called 'Christianity in Eight Days'. To provide a stronger base for Christianity, he incorporated local customs and traditions to his religious festivals and practices, especially during the Tet Festival period. The New Year festival, according to the local people's lunar calendar, is one of the most important annual events for the people of this agricultural economy. During the festival, people erect in front of their houses a high bamboo pole called a 'cay neu' to ward off evil spirits. Taking full advantage of this tradition, he advised people, especially his Christian followers, to hang a cross on top of the pole to highlight theTrinity. He advised followers to offer prayers in the first three days of the New Year to the Holy Father, Holy Son and Holy Ghost and thanksgiving to the Trinity and saints of the religion. In 1805, the Bishop of Vietnam wrote to all Christians in Northern Vietnam during the New Year festival urging them to be brothers and offer each other good wishes, entertain and dine with each other. This remains a good and healthy practice. These practices were maintained until the 1960s, after which new ones were introduced. For instance, the second day of the New Year is used to commemorate ancestors, in keeping with the Vietnamese custom. Interestingly, Vietnamese Christians have included various Christian festivals in the lunar calendar. Following the Trinity festival and the Candle festival comes Tet. Thus, they say: 'Ba Vua, Le Nen, Tet den sau lung' (If Epiphany and Candlemas have come, Tet cannot be far behind). Christian churches also prepare for Tet putting up beautiful decorations and engaging in communal activities#flat#to split, to cut
teu`rash, joculous, hare-brained
tha`rather, better#to carry, to bring to take with to set free, to release to forgive, to exempt#to set free#to release#to let out#to cast#to drop#to lower down#to give more play#to to breed (grow in water)#to fly#to fork out
tha cua`freely, at will, without restrain
tha du`o drop by parachute, to parachute
tha ho`fruly, as much as someone likes
tha hoa`to deteriorate, to degenerate
tha long`to let loose, to set loose
tha ma`graveyard, cemetary
tha rong`to allow to range freely
tha thu`to forgive, to pardon
thac`waterfall, falls
thac mac`to wonder to worry to be at cross purposes
thac si`agre're'
thac thom`covetous, to covet
thach`agar, Chinese gelatin (isinglass, Japanese gelatin) isinglass#to challenge, to defy#noi thach) to overcharge (prices)#thach cuoi) to ask for (in wedding)
thach anh`quartz
thach ban`slab of lithographic stone
thach cao`plasler
thach luu`pomogranate
thach nhu`Stalactite#talagmit
thach sung`ouse gecko
thach thuc`to challenge
thach tung`lycopod, lycopodium
thai`oetus#to discard, to eliminate, to discharge to dismiss, to sack#to slice
thai ap`fief, feud
thai binh`peaceful and prosperous
thai cuc`extreme, extremity
thai do`attitude
thai duong`temple sun
thai giam`eunuch
thai hau`Queen mother
thai hoi`to sack, to dismiss
thai nghen`with child, pregnant conceiving, in gestation of
thai qua`excessive, extreme
thai thuong hoang`King's father
thai tu`crown prince
thai y`danh tu cu royal physician
tham`carpet, rug, rapestry to cover#tragic#dark#dark deep black, blackish#deep, gorgeous warm#greedy avaricious#lot; ballot, vote#to visit; to call at#secret sneaking in the dark#to absorb, to suck to grasp, to sink in to feel, be penetrated with#to spy#to suck up#very (far, deep,)
tham ao`abstruse
tham canh`tragic situation, tragic plight
tham chi`even
tham chien`to participate in a war, to wage war
tham chinh`o take part in politics
tham cung`inner chamber
tham dinh`to consider and decide
tham do`to try to know, to sound (out)
tham doc`wicked
tham gia`to take part in, to participate in, to attend
tham giao`very close
tham hai`pitiful humiliating, ignominious
tham hiem`darkly wicked, fiendish#to explore
tham hoa`catastrophe, calamity
tham khao`to consult
tham khoc`highly destructive, devastating
tham kin`sneaking
tham lang`mute, silent
tham luan`speech
tham muu`staff
tham my`aste, sense
tham my hoc`esthetics
tham nhap`to penetrate, to infiltrate
tham nhuan`to seize, to grasp
tham nhung`to harass for bribes
tham nien`seniority
tham phan`judge
tham quan`to go for a sightseeing
tham quyen`competence, jurisdiction
tham sat`to slaughter, to massacre
tham sinh`to cling to life
tham tai`greedy for gain
tham tam`bottom of one's heart
tham tan`greedy and cruel
tham thia`to penetrate, to pervade to be worth, to be sufficient, to do
tham thien`to enter into meditation
tham thiet`heart-rending
tham thinh`to spy, to collect intelligence
tham thoat`quickly soon
tham thung`profound, deep
tham thuong`saddening, pitiful
tham tinh`deep affection
tham tram`deep
tham tu`detective
tham van`to interrogate, to question
tham vieng`to pay a call (visit) to
tham vong`ambition
tham y`secret thought
than`body, trunk, stem personal lot, fate flap, piece#intimate, dear, close#to support, to favour#coal#to moam, to lament#deity, genie unsual keenness extraodinary skill#kidney
than ai`affectionate
than bi`mystical
than bun`peat
than cam`coal dust
than can`close, near
than chi`graphite
than chu`incantation
than cui`charcoal
than danh`personal dignity
than dieu`marvelluos, miraculous
than dong`infant prodigy
than hanh`to come in person
than hinh`physical appearance
than hoc`theology
than hon`mind and soul
than huu`relatives and friends
than kinh`nerves
than ky`arvellous, miraculuos
than lan`lizard
than linh`deities, gods
than luc`miraculous strength
than mat`intimate, very close
than men`dear
than nhien`calm, unruffled
than oi`cam than#las!
than phan`lot, plight, condition
than phien`to moan, to complain
than phuc`to admire#to owe allegiance to, to submit to
than quyen`heavenly authority, deity
than sa`Cinnabar
than sac`look, complextion, countenance
than thanh`deities, gods#sacred, holy
than the`body#life, status
than thien`friendly
than thiet`near and dear
than tho`to stroll
than thoai`mythology
than thong`magic, wonder-working
than thuoc`relatives, re'lation
than tinh`extraodinary skilful
than toc`at lightening speed
than trong`cautious
than tu`interjection
than tuong`icon
than xi`inder
thang`ladder stepladder scale, range, gamut pack of medicinal herbs#month menses time#straight straightforward at a stretch#to promote to come out of (a trance)#to win to boil to harness to brake
thang bang`balance, equilibrium
thang bom`practical, minded idiot
thang canh`beauty-spot, landscape#without restraint
thang cha`chap, fellow, bloke
thang du`surplus
thang dung`vertical
thang giac`sound, soundly
thang goc`perpendicular
thang hoa`to sublimate
thang hoac`supposing occasionally
thang loi`to succeed, to achieve#victory, success
thang may`lift, clivator
thang ngay`time
thang tay`without mercy
thang than`straightforward
thang thang`month after month, every month
thang the`to gain ground, to have an advantage
thang thien`to ascend heaven
thang thung`without mercy, without restraint
thang tien`o get promotions
thang tram`ups and downs
thang tran`to win a battle(victory)
thanh`citadel, rampart wall town, city#to achieve one's aim, to gain (win) one's end to turn into, to change into, to grow into, to make#sincere#prosperous#saint swell#tone, pitch slat, piece, lear,
thanh bach`pure and upright
thanh binh`peaceful; in peace
thanh ca`hymn
thanh canh`dainty
thanh chi`imperial edict
thanh cong`to succeed, to come off well
thanh cung`aint's shrine
thanh dam`frugal pure and noble
thanh dan`saint's birthday
thanh danh`fame#to achieve (gain) fame
thanh dat`to succeed, to be successful
thanh dia`the holy land
thanh duong`chancel
thanh gia`the cross#mperial carriage
thanh giao`puritanism
thanh hinh`to form up, to take shape
thanh hon`to get married
thanh kiem`orally pure
thanh kien`prejudice, bias
thanh kinh`sincerely reverent
thanh la`gong
thanh lich`elegant
thanh liem`full of integrity
thanh luy`defence works strong-hold, rampart
thanh minh`grave visiting festival#to explain away, to account for
thanh ngu`idiom; expression, phrase
thanh nhan`leisurly, leisured#saint
thanh nien`major
thanh nu`young girl
thanh pham`finished product
thanh phan`component; composition class status, social back-ground
thanh pho`City, town
thanh qua`fruits, results
thanh quan`larynx
thanh su`founder, father#to succeed
thanh tam`pure mind#sincere
thanh tao`refined mannered
thanh than`to get married#untroubled, relaxed
thanh thao`expert, skilled
thanh thi`psalm#urban place, town
thanh thien`blue sky
thanh thoat`light and flowing
thanh thoi`unoccupied, leisurely
thanh thu`therefore, so, hence
thanh thuong`emperor, king
thanh tich`achievement, accomplishment, performance
thanh tinh`tranquil, restful
thanh toan`to liquidate
thanh tra`to inspect
thanh trung`to purge
thanh tuu`achievement
thanh van`blue cloud adder of fame#written
thanh vang`quiet and deserted
thanh vien`member
thanh y`good intention, good will
thao`coarse silk silk tassel#herb#generous,open-handed dutiful scrawling#to write, to draft#proficient, skilled, experiencel#to open to untic, to undo, to unstitch, to unsew to drain (away)
thao da`to have diarrhea
thao dien`to manoeuvre to demonstrate
thao lao`wide open
thao luan`to discuss, to debate
thao lui`to withdraw, to retreat
thao luoc`strategy, art of war
thao luyen`to drill, to train
thao moc`plants, vegetation
thao nguyen`steppe
thao tac`manipulation, act#to manipulate, to operate
thao truong`drill-ground
thao tung`to sway, to control
thao vat`elever, mindful
thap`glazed terri-cotta jar#low poor, bad#to light, to burn#tower#to fit in to graft
thap ac`cross
thap cam`miscellaneous
thap canh`watch-tower, guardian box
thap hen`low, mean
thap ky`ecade
thap nga`pvory tower
thap phan`decimal
thap phuong`everywhere, all over the world
thap thoang`to appear and disappear alternately
thap toan`accomplished, perfect
thap tu`cross
that`to tie, to fasten to wear to slender#true, real, actual
that bai`to be defeated, to lose to fail, to be unsuccessful
that bat`to fail, to lose
that cach`awkward, aberrant
that chat`to tighten
that chi`frustrated
that co`to hang, to garrotte
that duc`unrighteous
that hieu`undutiful
that hoc`illiterate
that kinh`to startle
that lac`to mislay
that le`impolite
that lung`belt waist
that nghiep`unemployed, out of work
that nhan tam`unpopular
that phu`member of the rabble
that sac`blanch, pale
that sach`impolitic
that sung`to fall into disfavour
that tha`truthful
that than`to lose one's chastity
that the`to lose ground, to go down in the world
that tho`to commit an indescretion
that thu`to fall
that thuong`erratic, irregular
that tiet`to lose one's words, to failto keep one's word
that tin`fail to keep one's word
that tinh`seven feelings#love-lorn, lovesick
that tran`to lose a battle, defeated
that truyen`lost
that uoc`to fail (to keep) one's promise
that van`out of rhyme
that vong`to despair, to be disappointed
that y`be disapointed, be frustrated
thau`brass brass colour brass basin, wash-tub#scrawling#to contract to take all to pinch#to reach through, to pierce through
thau dao`through
thau dau`ricinus,castor-oil plant
thau khoan`contractor
thau kinh`lens
thay`all, every#corpse, body#teacher, master, father, dad#to replace, to substitute to change to moult#to see to find, to feel
thay boi`fortuneteller, soothsayer
thay chan`to replace, to take the place of
thay chua`pagoda warden bonze
thay doi`to change
thay dong`friar, monk
thay giao`shoolmaster
thay ky`lerk
thay ma`orpse, dead body
thay mat`n behalf of
thay phan`(cu) senior clerk
thay phap`(cu) sorcerer, magician
thay phien`to rotate, to do by turns
thay thuoc`physician, doctor
thay tu`priest, monk
thay tuong`physiognomist
thay vi`Instead of
the`(cu) wife#position disposition, posture power, authoritative like that, such, so#to replace, to substitute to mortgage#silk gauze#pungent#state genre aspect#tag card fortunetelling tablet#to put out#to swear
the bai`simmoning tablet
the boi`to swear, to vow
the cach`manner, way
the chat`constitution
the che`institution
the cuc`life
the dien`face
the duc`exercises, gymnastics
the gian`world people, the living
the gioi`world, universe
the gioi quan`world outlook
the he`generation
the hien`to express, to give expression to, to show
the ky`entury
the le`rules#to jut out
the luc`influence#physical strength
the luong`desolate
the nao`how why, well
the nghiem`experience
the nguyen`to give plighted word
the pham`substitute
the su`world affairs
the tat`to forgive
the thai`the way of the world
the tham`depressful, mournful, utterly tragic
the thao`sports
the the`shrill, piercing
the thi`then
the thong`fixed rule of conduct, conventional trend
the tich`volume
the toc`mandarin family
the tuc`the way of the world#temproral
the uoc`o wou, to swear
the van hoi`olympic games
them`to add#additional, added#to crave for to deign, condescend#veranda floor
them bot`adjust to add or cut details
them khat`to crave strongly for, to desire
them muon`to wish eagerly, to covet
then`latch (of a door) transversal bar (of a leed) medium#to feet ashamed to feel shy
then chot`crux, key
then mat`feel cheap
then thung`to feel ashamed
thenh thang`very spacious, immense
theo`scar, cicatrice, cicatrix#to follow to believe in to go over to#ccording to, on, at, in accordance with
theo doi`to watch for
theo duoi`to pursue patiently
theo guong`to follow the example of
theo leo`to peach, to sneak, to tell tales
thep`edge old bit#long,tuc) cunt#quire#to gild#steel an extra share
thet`to entertain, to treat to a feast#to scream, to shriek
theu`spade#to embroider
theu thao`easy-going
theu thua`to embroider
thi`decandrous persimmon#poetry#to compete, to race to take an examination#prime of youth full season#hen; but certainly, for sure#to risk, to sacrifice to hand out to grudge
thi chinh`municipal administration
thi cong`to execute
thi cu`examination
thi dan`burgher, burgess
thi diem`experimental place
thi du`example#or example, for instance in case, if, supposing
thi dua`to emulate
thi giac`sight
thi gio`time
thi hanh`to carry out, to execute
thi hao`great poet
thi hieu`taste, liking
thi hung`poetic inspiration
thi luc`eyesight
thi mang`to risk one's life
thi nghiem`experiment#to experiment
thi nhan`poet
thi phai`perhaps
thi phap`prosody
thi sanh`town hall
thi si`poet
thi sinh`candidate
thi tham`to whisper
thi thao`to whisper
thi the`corpse, body
thi tho`to bend
thi thot`to sneak in and out
thi thuc`visa, certify
thi toc`clan
thi tran`town
thi truong`market field of vision#mayor
thi tu`poetic thought
thi vi`poetic delight
thi xa`township, town
thia`spoon
thich`buddhist (a buddhist title)#to nudge to like, to be fond of to tattoo, to engrave
thich dang`appropriate
thich hop`suitable
thich khach`assassin
thich nghi`to adjust oneself, to adapt to
thich thu`pleasant, enjoyable#to enjoy, to take pleasure
thich ung`to cope suitably, to adapt oneself
thich y`satisfied, gratified
thiec`tin stale urine
thien`(nhu) Phat dhyana, ch'an, zen#good, kind#section, part piece of (literature, poem, essay)#thousand#to move#inclined to, prone to#superficial, shallow#to castrate to trim, to prune away
thien cam`sympathy
thien can`heaven's stem
thien chi`good will
thien chien`battle tested
thien chua`God
thien chua giao`christianism
thien co`eternity
thien dinh`predestined, fated#zenith
thien do`to move the capital
thien duong`paradise, heaven, elysium
thien gia`bonze
thien ha`world the people
thien huong`inclination, proclivity, tendency
thien kien`prejudice, partiality
thien loi`thunder genie
thien menh`heaven's order, heaven's will
thien mon`pagoda
thien nga`swan
thien nghe`skilled
thien nhien`nature
thien su`angel
thien tai`genius#natural calamity
thien tam`kind heart
thien tao`natural
thien than`angel
thien the`heavenly body
thien thoi`clement weather
thien tinh`inborn character
thien tu`son of heaven, emperor
thien tue`cycad
thien van hoc`astronomy
thien vi`biased, partial, unfair
thien xa`marksman
thien y`(thien kien) one's humdle idea#good intention
thieng lieng`sacred, holy
thiep`card (visiting, wedding, invitation,.) concubine#to gild to lose consciousness#urbane
thiet`real, true#to lose, to suffer a loss#to care for
thiet bi`leaden
thiet giap`armour
thiet hai`to suffer a loss, to suffer damage#damage, loss, injury
thiet ke`to design
thiet lap`to establish, to set up
thiet mang`to lose one's life, die
thiet moc`ironwood
thiet tha`keen on, attached to eager
thiet than`of one's own
thiet thuc`practical, realistic
thiet yeu`essential, requisite
thieu`to be short of, to lack to owe#to burn, to cremate
thieu hut`short of, inadequate, deficient
thieu huy`to destroy, to burn down
thieu mau`anaemic
thieu nao`sad at heart shably
thieu nhi`youngster, pioneer
thieu phu`young woman
thieu quang`spring days
thieu sinh quan`young cadet
thieu so`minority
thieu sot`to comnit, make a mistake#mistake, shortcoming
thieu ta`major
thieu than`ephemera, mayfly
thieu tuong`major general
thieu uy`second lieutenant
thim`aunt
thinh`bang#keen, sharp, sensitive#prosperous, thriving#silent, mum#to ring to invite politely
thinh cau`to request
thinh dat`successful in life
thinh gia`listener
thinh giac`hearing
thinh giao`to consult, to request advice from
thinh hanh`in vogue, popular
thinh linh`suddenly, all of a sudden
thinh nguyen`to explain one's wishes to
thinh no`outburst of anger, rage
thinh soan`ample, plentiful, abundant
thinh the`prosperous times
thinh thi`to request instructions (from.)
thinh thoang`occasionally, now and then
thinh tinh`solicitude
thinh tri`prosperous and peaceful
thinh vuong`prosperous, thriving
thip`to absorb
thit`meat, flesh pulp#to kill, to murder; to slaughter
thiu`to get stale#gloomily
thiu thoi`to get stale and smell
tho`coarse, husky; crude#fibre grain#poetry; verse#rabbit, hare the moon#to breathe, to respire#to live long, to live to be#to stick out; to jut out to show to slip#to vomit#to worship to adore, to take reverent care of#workman
tho au`of tender age
tho bac`silversmith, goldsmith
tho bi`reede, coarse
tho cao`barber
tho cua`sawyer
tho dai`to sigh
tho dan`aboriginal, native
tho dien`electrician
tho duc`moulder
tho han`solderer
tho lan`diver
tho lo`to confess, to pour out#to run, to be snotty
tho may`mechanic#tailor
tho moc`carpenter
tho nhuong`soil
tho o`indifferent#to ignore
tho phi`bandit, brigand
tho ren`blacksmith
tho so`sudimentary, primitive
tho son`painter
tho the`to murmur
tho tinh`saturn
tho tuc`vulgar
thoa`hair-brooch#to massage to apply to, to rub, to put on (to) wear#o be sateated, to be satisfied#to be sateated, to be satisfied
thoa chi`be satisfied#e satisfied
thoa dang`atisfactory
thoa hiep`o reach a compromise#to reach a compromise
thoa long`atisfied#satisfied
thoa ma`to insult
thoa man`o satisfy, to meet fully#to satisfy, to meet fully
thoa thich`atisfactorily#satisfactorily
thoa thuan`o agree (that.), to come to terms#to agree (that.), to come to terms
thoai hoa`to degenerate, to retrograde
thoai mai`easy-going, comfortable, relaxative
thoai thac`to deline
thoai thoai`slopingly
thoan thoat`in a flash; as a lighting
thoang`(thoang thoang)in a hint, a whiff of; slightly
thoang qua`to flash over
thoat no`to be clear off a debt, to pay off to get rid of
thoat than`to escape, to get out of
thoat tien`firstly, first of all, at first
thoc`to thrust, to put into
thoc gao`grains and rice
thoi`a long while#to stop no more, ever#bar, lump#habit, practice#stinking; addle, rotten#to give back (change,.)#to blow#to plunge, to fetch
thoi binh`peace; peaceful time
thoi co`time
thoi dai`era, age
thoi gian`time
thoi khoa bieu`timetable
thoi ky`period
thoi mien`to hypnotize, to mesmerize
thoi nat`corruptive, corrupt
thoi phong`to blow up
thoi quen`habit
thoi su`current event, newsreel
thoi thuc`to prod, to urge
thoi tiet`weather
thoi trang`fashion
thoi tuc`custom, routine
thoi vu`season
thom`fragrant, sweet-smelling#pineapple
thom tho`sweet-smelling
thon`hamlet#tapering, tapered daintily slender#to fill, to squeeze
thon da`countryside
thon nu`country girl
thon que`countryside, the country
thon thuc`to sob
thon tinh`to annex
thong`pine#through; clear, unchocked#to clear off, to unchock, to unclog to open#to allow traffic through#to let down, to hang down
thong bao`to communicate, to announce#announcement, communique'
thong cam`to sympathize, to pay compassion to
thong cao`communique
thong che`marshal
thong diep`message, memo
thong doc`governor
thong dong`leisurely#to be in collusion, to compromise, to be in league
thong dung`commonly used
thong kho`in agony, grcevous
thong le`routine
thong linh`to be commander-in-chief
thong minh`intelligent, clever
thong nhat`to unite, to unify#united
thong qua`to pass, to ratify#hrough, by
thong so`parameter
thong tan xa`news agency
thong thao`proficient (in.)
thong thuong`normal, common, usual#normally
thong tin`information#to inform
thong tri`to dominate, to rule
thong tuc`colloquial
thop`to nab; to snatch; to pinch
thot`to slip neatly#lame#to utter, to say
thot not`palmyra
thu`autumn;(My) fall#to collect to get back; to recall to obtain, to#letter#order, rank kind, sort, thing#second; inferior#pleasure, interest animal, beast, mammal#interesting, pleasant#to test; to try (attempt) (on,.)
thu bac`rank, order
thu but`autograph
thu cong`handicraft
thu dich`hostile
thu do`capital, metropolitan
thu don`to clear away, to tidy up
thu dong`passive
thu gom`to collect, to sum up
thu hoach`to harvest
thu hoi`to withdraw, to retrieve
thu hut`to attract, to draw
thu ky`ecretary; clerk
thu lai`(cu) clerk
thu lao`reward, pay, compensation#to reward, to pay
thu linh`leader
thu luom`to collect
thu nhan`to confess, to admit, to realize
thu nhap`income
thu oan`to hate, to play epique on (upon)
thu pham`culprit
thu phan`to pollinate
thu phong`library
thu quan`captain
thu quy`cashier
thu sinh`student
thu tha`leisurely; free; in sparetime
thu thach`trial; challenge#to try, to challenge
thu thai`at ease; relaxed#to conceive, to be impregnated
thu thanh`to record
thu thu`librarian; archivist
thu thuat`operation
thu tieu`to abolish, to annul
thu tin`(xem) thu tu
thu tinh`to inseminate, to fecundate
thu truong`chief officer#vice minister
thu tu`letters, correspondence#order, position
thu tuc`formality, procedure
thu tuong`Prime Minister
thu vi`pleasant, enjoyable
thu vien`library
thu vui`pleasure
thu xep`to arrange, to settle
thu yeu`secondary
thua`superfluous, in excess; excessive quite well#to comply with#thin, sparse occasional#to complain to#to lose, to be defeated
thua hanh`to execute, to carry out
thua huong`(xem) thua ke
thua ke`to inherit, to take over
thua kien`to bring to legal proceedings
thua nhan`to recognize, to admit
thua so`factor
thua thai`superabundant, overflowing
thua thiet`to suffer loss
thua thot`sparse; scattered
thuan`favourable apt with agreeable#tamed, meek familiar pure; uniform
thuan hoa`to domesticate
thuan khiet`pure
thuan ly`urely rational
thuan nhat`homogeneous, uniform
thuan phat`imple-minded
thuan phong my tuc`fine (good) custom
thuan thuc`well-trained
thuan tien`convenient; favourable
thuan tuy`pure
thuat`art#to narrate, to give an account of
thuat ngu`terminology, term
thuc`to wake (up); to sit (stay up)#mood#true, real
thuc bach`pressing, urgent
thuc chat`essence, substance
thuc dan`colonist
thuc day`to wake up
thuc don`menu
thuc duc`o urge
thuc dung`practical; pragmatic
thuc ep`to force, to goad
thuc hanh`to practise
thuc hien`to realize, to carry out
thuc nghiem`danh tu, dong tu experiment
thuc quyen`real power (authority)
thuc ra`in fact, actually
thuc su`really indeed; actual
thuc tai`reality
thuc tap`to practise
thuc te`reality, practice, real life#real, autual
thuc the`entity
thuc thu`lost, to fall (into); to surrender
thuc tinh`to awaken
thuc trang`actual situation (state)
thuc tu`national word
thuc vat hoc`botany
thue`tax#to hire to rent#rent, hired#rent
thue than`poll tax
thui`to hit, to plunge
thui thui`lonely, solitary
thum`stinking
thun`elastic
thung`basket#cask, barred, bucket#having holes, a hole; holed; pierced#rope
thung lung`valley
thung mung`baskets
thung thu`letter box
thuo`time, age, period#When
thuoc`medicine, medicament, drug powder#to poison to entice#metre#to tan, to cure to know by heart; to belong to, to be of
thuoc bac`chinese herbs
thuoc bo`tonic
thuoc cao`cataplasm
thuoc dan`paultice
thuoc day`tape measure
thuoc dia`colony
thuoc doc`poison, toxic substance
thuoc duoc`dahlia
thuoc ke`ruler
thuoc la`tobacco; cigarette
thuoc lao`rustic tobacco
thuoc me`narcotic, anaesthetic
thuoc muoi`bicarbonate of soda
thuoc nam`vietnamese herbs
thuoc ngu`soporific
thuoc nhuom`dye
thuoc phien`opium; drug
thuoc tay`cleanser, detergent
thuoc tinh`attribute
thuong`frequent, usual ordinary,common average#long-handled spear#to love tenderly#spade#to reward ; to award to enjoy; to gaze at
thuong cam`to feel sorry for
thuong cap`higher rank
thuong dang`top class (rank)
thuong de`The God, the Creator
thuong dinh`summit, top
thuong gia`trader merchant
thuong hai`to feel pity for
thuong hang`danh tu, tinh tu first class; first rate
thuong khach`guest of honour
thuong khi`often, frequently
thuong luong`to negotiate
thuong mai`commerce, trade#commercial
thuong ngay`every day
thuong nghi vien`(Anh) House of Lords; (My) Senate
thuong nhat`daily
thuong nho`to long for, to miss
thuong nien`yearly, annual
thuong pham`high grade
thuong sach`the best, the best policy
thuong si`sergeant major
thuong so`quotient
thuong tam`pitiful
thuong tang`higher layer
thuong tang kien truc`superstructure
thuong thuc`to enjoy
thuong thuong`usually, often
thuong tich`wound, injury
thuong toa`superior monk
thuong ton`to damage, to hurt
thuong truc`on duty
thuong tuong`lieutenant general; three-star general
thuong uyen`royal garden
thuong vo`martial
thuong vu`commercial affair, trade affair
thuong xuyen`regular, constant; frequent#regularly, frequently
thut`to pull back, to recede to pump out; to shoot
thut lui`to go backward ; to recoil to regress
thut thit`sniffingly
thuy chung`onstant, loyal
thuy dien`ydroelectricity
thuy dong luc hoc`ydrodynamics
thuy mi`gentle, sweet
thuy ngan`ercury
thuy su do doc`dmiral
thuy thu`ailor, seaman
thuy tinh`glass#arcury#sao thuy)
thuy to`reator; promulgator; premitive ancestor
thuy trieu`tide
thuyen`boat schooner
thuyen chai`fishing boat
thuyen chuyen`to transfer
thuyen thung`guffa, Kura, Koofa
thuyen truong`captain
thuyet`theory to lecture; to give a mock
thuyet giao`to preach
thuyet phuc`to convince; to persuade
thuyet trinh`to give a talk (on.); to lecture
ti`flaw, defect#to press against, to rest on (opon)
ti chut`very little bit
ti hi`very small, slit (mat)
ti hon`tiny
ti man`niggling
ti mi`minute, miticulous, detailed
ti nan`to flee from danger; to refuge
ti nua`in a short while
ti tach`dripping
ti te`whisperingly
ti teo`very little
ti ti`very little#very tiny
ti tien`mean, lease
ti toe`to show off excessively
ti vet`defect, flaw
ti xiu`Very little
tia`(dia phuong) dad, father#purple#ray; radiant jet#to trim, to prune
tia to`perilla
tich`to store up, to accumulate
tich cuc`active, zealous positive, constructive
tich lieu`solitary, quiet
tich phan`integral
tich thu`to confiscate
tich tru`to hoard, to store up
tiec`banquet, party, feast#to regret, to be sorry to grudge
tiec re`to regret
tiec ruou`coktail party
tiec tra`tea party
tiem`shop#to inject to probe#to usurp
tiem an`restaurant
tiem luc`potential
tiem tang`potential, latent
tiem thuc`subconscience
tien`convenient, proper#fairy#first#money#front#to advance, to march forward#to see off
tien bac`money
tien biet`to see out (off)
tien bo`to progress, to make progress#progressive
tien canh`fairyland
tien coc`deposit
tien cua`wealth
tien de`axiom#premise, premiss
tien dinh`preordained, predestined
tien do`future#rate of progress
tien doan`to predict, to foretell
tien hanh`to carry out
tien le`change
tien mat`cash
tien nga`fairy
tien nghi`comforts, conveniences
tien nhan`predecessor
tien nu`fairy nymph
tien phong`avant guard, pioneer#vanguard
tien quyet`prerequisite
tien si`doctor
tien su`prehistory#prehistorical, prehistoric
tien tay`at hand, handy
tien te`currency
tien thoai`advance and retreat
tien tien`advanced, developed
tien tieu`outward, front
tien toi`to progress, to come to
tien tram`advance party#in advance
tien tri`to foretell
tien trinh`process
tien tuyen`front line
tieng`sound, voice language name, reputation hour
tieng dong`noise
tieng long`slang
tieng noi`language, tongue, voice
tieng tam`reputation, fame, renounce
tieng vang`repercussion, resound
tiep`to procede to receive to transfuse to help, to lend a hand
tiep can`to approach, to reach#adjacent
tiep chuyen`to keep company with
tiep dai`to treat, to entertain, to receive
tiep don`(xem) tiep
tiep giap`to adjoin, to be contiguous
tiep kien`to receive, to accept
tiep nhan`to receive, toaccept
tiep noi`to proced, to follow closely
tiep quan`to take over
tiep tan`to entertain, to receive#receptionist
tiep theo`continuouss, following
tiep thu`to accept, to receive
tiep tuc`to continous
tiep vien`to supply, to support reinforce
tiet`section period time, season#to secrete, to emit
tiet dien`section
tiet kiem`to economize, to practise thrift
tiet lo`to reveal, to let out
tiet muc`item
tiet trung`to sterilize#sterile
tieu`pepper flute#to digest to dispel, to kill to resolve
tieu ban`sub committee
tieu bang`state
tieu bieu`to symbolize, to represent#typical, examplarsy
tieu chuan`standard, criterion, ration, portion
tieu cuc`negative, passive
tieu de`heading
tieu diem`focus
tieu diet`to wipe out, to annihilate
tieu dieu`desolate
tieu doan`battalion
tieu doc`antidotal
tieu doi`squad
tieu dung`to consume
tieu hao`to wear out, to thin out, to consume
tieu hoa`to digest
tieu hoc`primary education
tieu lam`funny, humorous
tieu luan`essay
tieu nhan`mean person
tieu quy mo`small scale
tieu su`biography, history
tieu tan`dashed, destroyed
tieu thu`to consume to sell
tieu thua`Southern Buddhism, theravada
tieu thuyet`novel, fiction
tieu tien`to urinate
tieu tru`to wipe out, to suppress
tieu tu san`petty bourgeoisie
tieu tuy`emaciated, shabby
tieu vong`to disappear
tieu xai`to spend
tieu xao`trifling skill
tim`heart wick#to find, to look for, to seek#violet
tim hieu`to survery, to search, to court
tin`news, information#to believe
tin cay`to rely on, to trust
tin don`rumour
tin dung`credit
tin hieu`signal, sign
tin nhiem`to trust
tin phieu`bond, securities
tin vit`hoax, cannard
tinh`love, affection situation, plight#lovingly, lovely#province, town#conscious awake, aware#temper, dioposition trait, quality property habit#to calculate, to rackon to consider to plan to count
tinh bot`starch
tinh ca`love-song
tinh cach`character, trait
tinh cam`sentiment, affection
tinh cau`star
tinh chat`essence#nature, property
tinh che`to refine
tinh dau`essential oil
tinh day`to wake up
tinh dich`sperm
tinh duong`to recuperate
tinh gian`to streamline#streamline
tinh hinh`situation
tinh hoa`quintescence, genius, cream, flower
tinh hoan`testicle
tinh hoc`statics
tinh khi`temper
tinh khiet`pure, clean
tinh ly`ownship
tinh net`nature
tinh nguyen`to volunteer
tinh nhan`lover
tinh nhue`well trained
tinh tai`stationary
tinh tao`alert, active, in full possession, vigilant
tinh te`fine, precise
tinh than`mind, mental sence,spirit, nerve
tinh that`in truth, as a matter of fact sincere feeling
tinh the`situation
tinh tiet`detail, particular episode
tinh toa`to meditate
tinh toan`to calculate, to count; to weigh the pros and cons
tinh trang`state, situation, condition
tinh tu`adjective#stars
tinh vi`sophisticated, fine, well refined
tinh y`intention
tinh yeu`love; passion
tit`dud#title, heading
tit mu`very far away, far remote
to`big#bowl#to apply colour to, to colour, to trace#nest group, team#servant#, me#sheet, piece of, sheet of#shining, bright#to express, to show#silk, silk cord#young, teenage
to beo`corpulent, portly
to cao`to accuse, to denounce, to expose
to chuc`to establish, to set up to organize
to diem`to embellish, to adorn, to make up
to giac`to inform against, to expose to
to hong`dodder marriage tie
to hop`combination, cooperation
to kho`to air one's grievances
to lon`big and tall
to mo`curious, inquisitive
to patch`aving patches; patchy
to quoc`fatherland
to ra`to prove, to seem, to show
to tat`great, considerable
to tien`ancestor, forefather
to tung`to litigate
to tuong`huge, enormous#to long to day-dream#to understand thoroughly, to seize through
to ve`to embroider#to show, to prove to be, to appear
to vo`mason bee, wall bee arch
toa`to spread to emit, to send out
toa an`tribunal, court
toa dam`o hold informal talk
toa do`o ordinate
toa huong`o enjoy
toa lac`e located, to be situated
toa nha`uilding
toa soan`ewspaper house
toa thien`o sit in meditation
toac`satisfied
toan`all, as a whole#gang, group#to intend
toan bo`whole, all
toan dien`all-sided, wholly
toan hoc`mathematic
toan luc`all one's heart
toan phan`complete
toan quoc`the whole country#nation-wide
toan quyen`full power, governor general
toan the`all of, the whole
toan tinh`to intend
toang hoac`wide open
toc`ethos#hair#to turn up (over); to blow up
toc do`speed
toc hanh`express
toc ky`horthand
toc mai`sidewhiskers; (My) sideburns
toc to`conjugal love
toe`to splash
toet`to gape
toi`garlic#night, evening#dark dull, dense#extremely#offence, crime, guilt#poor, bad, mediocre#subject servant self#I, me to temper, to slake#to come, to arrive, to reach#to die, to waste
toi ac`crime
toi boi`to pieces; up, down
toi cao`supreme
toi da`maximum
toi hau thu`ultimatum
toi lui`to frequent
toi mang`to lose one's life die
toi mit`completely dark
toi nghia`obscure
toi pham`criminal
toi tan`ultramodern
toi tay`leek
toi te`mean, bad
toi thieu`danh tu, tinh tu minimum
toi to`subordinate, subject
toi va`offence, fault
tom`ploppingly#shrimp#to nab, to catch
tom gop`to collect, to take (from.)
tom he`prawn
tom hum`lobster
tom lai`in brief, in short
tom tat`to summarize
ton`bold, mighty#to pay for#tole
ton chi`guideline, principle
ton giao`Religion#esides the traditional religious practices in Vietnam, there are other major religions such as Buddhism, Catholicism, Protestantism, Islam, the Cao Dai sect and the Hoa Hao sect... At present, over 70 percent of the population of Vietnam are either Buddhist or strongly influenced by Buddhist practices. About 10 percent of the population are considered to be catholic. The number of Protestants is estimated at a mere 400,000 Most of the Islamic followers in Vietnam are those of the Cham ethnic minority group living in the central part of the central coast. The number of Islamic followers in Vietnam totals about 50,000. The Cao Dai Church in Tay Ninh is the central point nearby which are located settlements of Cao Dai followers in South Vietnam. The number of followers of this sect is estimated at 2 million. More than 1 million Vietnamese are followers of the Hoa Hao sect. Most of them live in the western part of South Vietnam
ton hai`to damage, to hurt#damage
ton kem`costly
ton kho`in stock
ton nghiem`solemn
ton sung`to venerate
ton tai`to exist, to remain
ton ten`to dangle, to hang loosely
ton that`loss
ton thuong`to hurt, to injure
ton ti`hierarchy
ton trong`to respect
tong`to cram
tong bi thu`secretary general
tong biet`to see off
tong co`to drive out, to expel
tong cong`total
tong dai`switchboard
tong giam`to put into prison, go to jail
tong hanh dinh`headquarters
tong hoi`federation
tong hop`to collect and classify to synthetize#collective, synthetic general
tong ket`to sum up
tong nguc`to engaol
tong pham`accomplice
tong quan`to enlist, to join up
tong quat`general, comprehensive
tong so`total
tong tham muu`eneral staft
tong tich`origin
tong tuyen cu`general election
top`small group#to gulp, to sip
top tep`munchingly
tot`pawn#good#swiftly
tot bung`kind-hearted
tot dinh`top, peak
tot do`extremity
tot lanh`auspicious, propitious
tot ma`good - looking
tot nghiep`o graduate, graduate
tot so`fortunate, lucky
tot tieng`well - reputed, popular
tra`tea, tea-plant#to fit in to add, to apply to look up, to consult#to return, to give back to pay
tra cuu`to look up, to look through
tra dua`to retaliate
tra hang`to sham surrender
tra khao`to torture
tra loi`to answer, to reply
tra thu`to revenge
trac`about, around#basket#rosewood, kingwood#to sprain
trac ba diep`thuja
trac dia hoc`geodesy
trac nghiem`to test
trac tuyet`pre-eminent, outstanding
trach`to reproach for, to blame
trach mang`to scold, to reprimand
trach nhiem`responsibility
trai`barrack, camp farm#left wrong contrary#oyster young man, boy#male#to spread, to lay; to stretch out
trai khoay`inconventional, irregular, unacceptable
trai mua`out of season, out of fashion
trai nghia`antonymous
trai phep`illegal
trai qua`to spend; to experience
trai tre`boyhood
trai xoan`oval
tram`brooch hairpin#cajuput#deep, bass, low#station, stop space station#to behead#to cault, to stop, to close; to fill (tooth)
tram huong`aloe wood
tram mac`taciturn
tram trong`serious
tran`battle, fight#brazen-faced#ceiling#bare, naked plain#forehead#python#to overflow, to flood
tran an`to assure, to calm down
tran ap`to suppress, to put down
tran chau`pearl
tran dia`battlefield
tran gian`the world, earth
tran giu`to keep, to defend
tran tinh`to keep calm#to make clear, to account on
tran tre`to overflow
tran tro`to toss about (in bed); to ponder
tran troc`dong tu, tinh tu to toss about
tran trong`to consider, to respect
tran trui`bare, clear
tran truong`naked, nude
tran tuyen`front line, firing line
trang`moon#page#to shift#to rinse to spread to cover thinly, to coat#white clear
trang bach`all white
trang bi`to equip
trang da`white pale
trang diem`to make up, to beautify
trang duc`opalescent, milky
trang giang dai hai`rambling, lengthy
trang gio`flirtation
trang hoang`to decorate
trang le`magnificent
trang mieng`to have a dessert
trang nga`ivory-white
trang ngan`snow - white
trang nghiem`solemn
trang suc`to wear, to adorn
trang tay`cleared out, without a penny, penniless
trang thai`state
trang toat`white all over
trang trao`bold, shameless
trang tri`to decorate
trang tron`obviously
trang trong`solemn
tranh`painting, picture thatch#to compete, to fight for#to avoid, to shirk to give way to dodge
tranh cai`to argue, to dispute
tranh cu`to stand for, to run for
tranh dua`to compete
tranh luan`to discuss
tranh thu`to make use of
tranh tieng`o save from whispers
trao`to hand, to give#to overflow, to brim over
trao doi`to exchange
trao luu`trend, line
trao phung`satirical
trao tay`to hand
trao tro`shifty, devious
trap`casket
trap trung`rolling
trat`to sprain to run off to miss, to fail#warrant#to plaster, to coat
trat tu`order
trau`Betel#uid of betel (and areca-nut)#An trau (Betel chewing): A popular custom formed in Vietnam since time immemorial. Each quid of betel consists of a piece of areca-nut and a betel leaf with no lime spread on it, and in some cases, included with a piece of tobacco. Traditionally, Vietnamese people invite their guests to chew betel before starting a conversation. This explains thoroughly the saying known to everyone: "A quid of betel and areca-nut starts the ball rolling"#An trau la tap tuc co tu thoi co. Mieng trau gom co: Mot mieng cau, Mot mieng la trau khong co quet voi. Co noi con them mot mau thuoc lao. Trong phong tuc Viet Nam, co tuc moi trau hau chuyen, nen co cau "Mieng trau la dau cau chuyen"#buffalo#rice husk
trau bo`cattle
trau chuot`to polish, to smooth down
trau doi`to improve
trau nuoc`hippopotamus
tray`scraped, scratched
tre`bamboo#late, tardy#to sagg#to pout#young#children
tre con`child#childish
tre nai`sluggish, tardy
tre trung`youthful
tre tuoi`young
tren`upper, above#upper, on, over#higher, superior
treo`askew, twisted, wry#to climb#to hang, to suspend to suspend, to put aside
treo giai`to offer a prize
treo ham`aw O breaking
treo ngoe`pposite, reversed
treo treo`screenchingly; continually
tret`groundfloor#to caulk, to plaster, to daub
treu`to tease; to nettle
treu nguoi`to provoke
treu tuc`to irritate
tri`mind#to treat, to cure to suppress,to quell to chastise
tri an`grateful
tri don`ull-witted, doltish
tri gia`to value, to estimate to cost, to value#value, cost
tri giac`perception
tri hoan`to delay
tri khon`intelligence, wisdom
tri ky`eart-to-heart, comfidences
tri luc`mental power
tri nho`memory
tri oc`brain, intellect
tri su`to manage
tri thuc`intelligensia#knowledge
tri toi`to punish
tri tue`intelligence
tri vi`to rule, to reign
trich`to extract, to take excerpts to deduct, to draw
trich dan`to quote
trich thuong`condescending, condescent
trien`seal
trien lam`to exhibit
trien mien`interminable
trien vong`prospect, promise
triet de`thoroughly
triet gia`philosopher
triet ha`to wipe down, to eradicate
triet hoc`philosophy
triet tieu`annul
trieu dai`dynasty, reign
trieu dinh`court
trieu nghi`court ritual
trieu phu`millionaire
trieu tap`to call, to summon, to convoke
trieu than`courtier
trinh`to submit to show, to present to report
trinh bach`virginal, virtuous
trinh bao`to report
trinh dien`to perform#to present oneself
trinh do`standard, level
trinh nu`virgin
trinh tiet`virginity
trinh trong`formal, solemn
trinh tu`order
triu men`tender, tenderly
tro`ash#shameless, brazen-faced inert#to burst, to open to show, to display#to point, to indicate#to turn; to change#trick
tro cap`to subsidize, to supply as relief
tro choi`game
tro chuyen`to chat, to talk, to have conversations
tro dong tu`auxiliary verb
tro dua`joke, jest
tro giong`to change tune
tro got`to turn back, to retrace
tro he`farce
tro lai`to return, to come back (again)
tro ly`ssistant
tro mat`to change about
tro nen`to turn, to become
tro ngai`hindrance, obstacle, obstruction#to hinder, to obstruct
tro thu`assistant, helper, supporter
tro trao`boldfaced, impudent
tro treu`whimsical
tro troi`lonely, solitary
tro trui`nude; denuded
tro ve`to come back, to be back
tro vui`entertainment, amusement
tro xuong`downwards
troc`shaven leare#to scale off; to come off
troi`sky good, goodness, heaven weather-it#to drift, to float along to pass, to elapse#to emerge, to go (come) up#to rope, to tie, to bind#to surpass, to dominate dominant
troi buoc`to bind, to setter
troi chay`fluent; smooth-going
troi day`to rise up; to flare up
troi giat`to drift
troi oi`mischievous, rascal; untolerable blast! Oh, no!
trom`to steal, to burgle
trom nghi`o suppose, to assume
trom trem`approximately, about
tron`fully, completely; entirely; all#momentum, impetus situation; tendency#round, circular full, complete#smooth slippery plain#to glower#to hide oneself, to run away to evade, to shirk#to mix, to blend; to turn upside down
tron tria`plump, round
tron tru`smooth#smoothly
tron vo`perfectly round
trong`clear, pure#ithin, in for#internal, interior#drum, tomtom#cock,male empty, vacant; unoccupied#to grow, to cultivate#to look to face, to open to to mind, to look after#to think high of, to hold in esteem
trong am`stressed sound
trong canh`night watch
trong cay`to depend, to rely on
trong cho`to expect
trong coi`to look after, to keep an eye on
trong com`Cylindrical drum#LEGEND OF "TRONG COM". A famous song from Vietnamese folklore goes thus: "How joyful to have a Trong Com; and it is an honour for those who can clap it skilfully..."The lyrics and the melody are usually accompanied by a picture showing boy or girl drummers with axehead-shaped turbans over their heads and long-shaped drums hung loose from the neck down to about the belly... All these easily mislead the audience to believe that Trong Com (the Vietnamese cylindrical drum) is an ordinary musical instrument. In fact, in the national musical instrument ensemble, Trong Com contributes an unique sound - now happy and cheerful, now low, soft and woeful recalling the innermost feelings of one's native country, one's homeland...The drum is held at both ends by a strip hanging over the performer's neck. It thus lie horizontally against the belly of the drummer who uses both hands to clap the drumheads. In the past, people stuck a handful of glutinous rice to each drumhead. Trong Com is used in worshipping and various ceremonies, in cheo (traditional operetta) and in Phuong Bat Am or an octet (a popular ensemble of eight instrumental timbres). The glutinous rice stuck against the drumhead lends its name to the drum (Trong Com in Vietnamese literally means "Rice Drum"). Legend goes that once upon a time, there was a poor Confucian disciple who was very unlucky in competitions and examinations and had to go begging. Everyday, he went past the mansion of a wealthy family where there was always a girl waiting to give him rice. One day, so moved and also ashamed by her good deed, the young man came to thank the girl. She however said that she had done just what she had been ordered to do by her young mistress. Learning that, the man requested to see the mistress, who was a kind-hearted girl. Seeing the poor scholar bowing with joined hands, the damsel hurriedly bent down to raise him and said: "Never mind, please! I understand and sympathize with your unlucky lot. Since you depart now, I would like to give you a small sum as travelling expenses and this golden hair pin in the earnest hope that one day you will succeed in making both a living and your way in the world and come back to the native land, and then...". The girl left the sentence unfinished, but the scholar had got the message. Fully conscious of his fated misfortune at the workplace and in his pursuit of fame, he decided to turn to music with a determination to achieve success. As time passed, he became famous. Bearing in mind the old promise, he returned to the native village, hoping to meet again his benefactor. Unfortunately, upon arrival, he learnt that the damsel had just passed away due to illness. In his great lament, the young man brought along his musical instrumentalist guild to pay tributes to the deceased and himself created a small, cylindrical drum with rice stuck against both drumheads in commemoration of the ill-fated girl. The strip from which the drum was hung was made of white cloth symbolizing the mourning band. And as he clapped the drumheads, the doleful sounds echoed his deep pain and the loss of his sweetheart
trong dai`important
trong diem`main point
trong khi`while, meanwhile
trong khong`mpty#naddressed
trong luc`gravity
trong luong`weight
trong ngong`to wait for, to look forward to
trong sach`clean
trong sang`pure, bright
trong suot`transparent
trong tai`load, capacity, tonnage#umpire, referee; arbitrator
trong thuong`to reward generously
trong trai`exposed, spacious desolate, empty
trong tranh`to rock
trong vong`within
trong yeu`essential
trot`pouting#to scrape off; to slip#slippery
trot lot`smoothly
tru`pillar, pier, post#to eliminate, to liquidate to subtract, to give discount#xcept#to store (up)
tru an`to take shalter
tru bi`to prepare
tru chan`to take shalter, to retreat
tru danh`famed, renowned
tru diet`to exterminate, to extirpate
tru khu`to extirpate
tru ngu`to reside
tru tinh`lyrical, lyric#to plan, to intend
tru treo`to hout, to scream
tru tru`to hesitate
trua`noon, midday#day,noon
truan chuyen`up-and-down
truat phe`to depose, to dethrone
truc`axle-axis#to lift#to be on duty
truc dao`oleander
truc giac`intuition
truc giao`orthogonal
truc khuan`bacillus
truc quan`visual
truc thang`helicopter
truc tiep`direct
truc trac`hitch#broken down
truc trang`rectum
truc xuat`to expel, to drive out
trum`chieftain, magnate#to cover,to put on
trung`depressed, sunken, hollow#egg ovum#mid, medium#to glower, to glare at#to hit; to catch to win, to gain
trung bay`to display, to show
trung binh`overage, mean
trung ca`acne, comedo
trung cap`intermediate
trung cu`elected
trung doan`regiment
trung doi`platoon
trung du`midland
trung dung`to requisition
trung duong`ocean
trung gian`agent
trung hoa`to neutralize
trung hop`to coincide
trung khu`centre
trung lap`identical; coincisive#neutralist
trung nien`middleaged
trung nuoc`budding
trung phat`to punish
trung si`sergeant
trung so`to win a lottery
trung ta`lieutenant-colonel
trung tam`centre
trung thanh`loyal, faithful
trung thu`mid-autumn#to confiscate
trung thuc`earnest; faithful
trung tri`to chastise, to punish
trung tu`to hit it#to restore
trung tuan`mid-month, middle; fortnight
trung tuyen`selected, chosen
trung uong`danh tu, tinh tu central
trung van`chinese
truoc`former; first#before, ahead last, past first; before hand
truoc day`formerly, before
truoc khi`before
truoc mat`in front of
truoc nhat`firstly, above all
truon`to creep, to crawl
truong`head, leader#eldest; chief, head#moor#school field; ground#long#to swell, to be bloated to unfurl, to set up
truong ca`epic
truong dua`race course, race track
truong ga`station master
truong hoc`school
truong hop`circumstance, case
truong khoa`ean
truong ky`oach
truong phai`school
truong phong`chief; manager
truong thanh`to grow up#mature
truong tho`long-lived
truot`to slip, to skid to fail; to miss
truot tuyet`o ski
trut`to pour into (down) to set, to fall to shift on to
truu tuong`abstract
truy duoi`o chase, to pursue
truy kich`to pursue
truy lac`depraved, debauched
truy na`to hunt for
truy nguyen`to trace back to
truy to`to sue
truyen`story#to communicate, to transmit to hand down
truyen ba`to propagate
truyen cam`emotive, expressive
truyen hinh`television
truyen ky`ife story, cover
truyen thanh`radio
truyen thong`Tradition#he life style of Vietnamese people is closely attached to their villages and native land. LANG (village in Vietnamese language) is CHIENG (in Tay-Thai language), BAN (in Muong language) and BUON (in languages of several minority groups inhabiting Central Highlands). LANG is not only an administrative organization but also an economic unit based on sections of land on which farming products are made. Typical village features may be a banyan tree standing at the village front gate (or bamboo groves surrounding the village), deep water wells, the roof of the village temple, a far mountain peak, a river running nearby or may be the paddy fields and joyous bustling village festivals
truyen thu`to impart, transmit
truyen thuyet`legend
tu`four, fourth#private, personal#stagnant obtuse#to knock up to sit in meditation#word#temple guard#rom, since#to renounce, to give up
tu ban`capital
tu bi`merciful
tu biet`to part, to farewell to
tu binh`prisoner of war (POW)
tu bo`to give up, to abandon; to desert
tu cach`status, capacity behaviour, conduct
tu cao`self conceited, self-important
tu cap`to supply oneself
tu chat`nature, individual
tu che`cupboard
tu chi`four limbs
tu choi`to refuse, to decline
tu chu`to self control
tu cung`uterus
tu dac`conceited
tu dien`capacitor#dictionary
tu dien hoc`lexicography
tu do`free, liberal#liberty, freedom
tu dong`automatic
tu dong hoa`to automatic
tu duc`four virtues
tu duong`to sefl-improve
tu duy`thought, thinking
tu giac`quadrilateral#quadrangle#voluntary self-conscious
tu ham`confined
tu hao`to pride of (on)
tu hoc`to teach oneself,#self-educated
tu hop`to gather, to assemble
tu hu`koel
tu huu`privately-owned
tu huyt`whistle
tu khoai`four pleasures
tu kinh`wardrobe
tu lanh`refrigerator, fridge
tu lap`self-made, independent
tu lenh`commander
tu lieu`material, documentation
tu lo`dead route
tu loi`self-interest
tu luc`self-reliant
tu mi`mustache and hair
tu ngu`extinct language
tu nguyen`etymology#spontaneous
tu nhien`nature#natural
tu noi`connective
tu phap`justice#morphology
tu phat`spontaneous
tu phia`all sides, all around
tu phong`to self-proclaim#self-proclaimed
tu quy`four seasons
tu quyet`o determine by oneself
tu sach`bookcase
tu san`capitalist
tu sat`to commit suicide, to kill oneself
tu si`martyr
tu sua`to repair, to mend
tu te`kind, decent
tu than`The Death#to self-improve
tu the`posture, position
tu thien`charitable
tu thong`magnetic flux
tu thu`feud#to confess
tu thuc`private
tu tien`without permission
tu tin`self-confident
tu tinh`magnetism
tu ton`moderate
tu tran`dead in battle
tu tri`autonomous
tu trong`self-respectful
tu tu`rehetorical, stylistic
tu tuan`forty#forties
tu tuc`self-sufficient, self-supporting
tu tung`cramped#topsy-turvy
tu tuong`thought, ideology
tu va`horn
tu van`advisory
tu vi`horoscope
tu vien`monastery, abbey
tu vung`vocabulary
tu vung hoc`lexicology
tu xung`to assume, to proclaim oneself
tu y`self-willed
tua`fringe, tassel feeler, antenne#title, heading#to lean against (on)#similar#to flock out, to separate
tuan bao`eekly magazine
tuan duong ham`cruiser
tuan hanh`o parade, to march
tuan kiet`talent
tuan le`eek
tuan lenh`o comply with; to obey
tuan thu`to keep to, to abide by
tuan tra`o go on a patrol
tuan tu`andsome and intelligent
tuc`practice, custom#worldly, secular vulgar, coarse
tuc cau`football
tuc cuoi`ridiculous
tuc gian`to be (get angry)
tuc ha`(cu, co) thou
tuc huyen`to remarry
tuc la`that is, it means that
tuc le`rule, practice
tuc ngu`proverb
tuc tan`coarse, vulgar
tuc thi`immediately, at once
tuc tiu`obscene
tuc toc`instantly, right away
tuc truc`to keep watch to stand by, to sit by
tui`pocket bag
tui tham`reediness
tui than`to feel self-pity
tum`snatch#to grab, to nab to bundle#to gather#with a plop#with a plop
tum hup`swollen, bloated
tun hut`very (deep)
tun mun`small petty, mean
tung`to toss, to throw to spread to rummage about#used to#ever
tung bach`conifers
tung bung`jubilant
tung niem`to chant prayers, to pray
tung quan`broken, needy
tung the`tung thieu in necessity, needy
tung tich`whereabouts, trace
tung tiem`economic, thrifty
tung toe`splashingly, all around
tung trai`experienced
tuoc`title#to strip
tuoc doat`to dispossess of
tuoi`age, year of age#fresh raw cheerful, joyful, jocund#water, to irrigate, to sprinkle
tuoi cuoi`smiling
tuoi tan`cheerful
tuoi tho`childhood#life, age
tuoi tre`youth
tuom tat`smart, well-cared
tuon`to spurt, to stream out to give out, to throw out
tuong`Sort, kind#lassical drama#Tuong (Classical drama) was formed in the 12th century, and in the 17th century it was very much in vogue. Since 1950, Tuong has referred to Nghe Thuat Hat Boi (Classical drama art). The Tuong play consists of dances, songs and music which are highly stylised, conventional and imbued with symbolism. Thanks to the stylised, symbolic gestures used by the actors, and a good deal of imagination on behalf of the spectators, the scenery is very simple. Mountains, hills, rivers, dawn, twilight, horse riding and battlefields, are all presented on stage by using a minimum of accessories and technical equipments. Tuong includes many strict norms on styles of speaking, singing and dancing. In chronological order and by their contents, the Tuong plays are divided into traditional plays, royal plays, social plays and modern plays. The most popular ones include Son Hau, Dao Phi Phung, Tam Nu Do Vuong, Trung Nu Vuong and Ngheu So Oc Hen#general#co) king physiognomy#statue#co) elephant#to think#wall
tuong dac`in concord
tuong doi`relative#relatively
tuong duong`equivalent
tuong hinh`pictographic
tuong lai`future
tuong mao`outward look
tuong nho`to memorize
tuong nhu`it seems, it appears
tuong quan`to interrelate, to correlate
tuong tan`thorough, thoroughly
tuong thuat`to relate, to report
tuong tro`to interdepend#interdependent
tuong trung`to symbolize#symbolic
tuong tu`lovesick
tuong tuong`to imagine
tuong ung`correlative
tuot`to pluck off, to pull off to draw#to slip to come out (off)#directly, straight (to), straight away
tuu diem`tavern
tuu sac`wine and women
tuy`marrow#pancreas#though#to depend#in accordance with, it depends, it's up to
tuy but`essay
tuy nhien`however, but, yet
tuy rang`although, despite
tuy than`personal
tuy the`nevertheless
tuy theo`according to
tuy thich`s one wishes
tuy tung`escort, accompaniment
tuy vien`ttacher
tuyen`gland line lane#to choose, to select
tuyen bo`to declare, to state
tuyen dai`hades, hell
tuyen dung`to select, to recruit
tuyen duong`to commend, to cite
tuyen mo`to recruit
tuyen ngon`Bac Ho doc tuyen ngon doc lap#proclamation, declaration
tuyen truyen`to propagate
tuyet`excellent; great, mighty#snow nap
tuyet chung`exlinct
tuyet dieu`admirable, wonderful
tuyet doi`absolute
tuyet luan`supernormal, paranormal
tuyet tac`masterpiece
tuyet tich`o vanish, to leave no trace
tuyet voi`excellent, splendid
tuyet vong`hopeless, desperate#to despair of
ty`ervice#illiard, billion#pleen
ty gia`ate
ty le`roportion, ratio, rate
ty so`ate, ratio#core
ty trong`ensity#roportion
u`fast, swiftly#mum, mom tumour#bumpy, swollen#to swell#to keep (with.)#sullen, gloomy#yeah; yes
u am`overcast, dull
u an`dark, secret
u dong`stagnant
u dot`sullen, dull, gloomy
u e`sorrowful
u hon`dead soul, ghost
u huyet`o congest
u o`to babble; to stammer#utter inarticulate sounds
u oa`peekaboo, peepbo
u ran`ranium
u ru`mournful, doleful
u sau`melancholy, sullen
u tich`secluded and quict
u u`brimful
u uat`spleenful
ua`be fond of, like#brown; waning#to flow, to rush#to overflow, to run#well! Ooh!
ua nhin`eye-catching, attractive
uan khuc`mystery
uat han`deeply resent
uat uc`to writhe
uc`(country) Australia#chest#to choke with anger#swillingly, with a gulping
uc che`to restrict; to control, to suppress, to repress; to restrain
uc ich`heavy;#heavily
ue khi`noxious; filthy air
ue oai`slack, sluggish
ui`Oogh! Oof!#to iron to bulldose to shoo
ui cha`Well, well! Oh, well!
um`to fool to hug, to huddle
um tum`luxuriant, rank
ung`addle, rotten#boot#sparrow hawk#to agree, to accept#waterlogged
ung bien`to cope accordingly
ung dap`to reply
ung dung`deliberate#to apply
ung ho`to support
ung hong`to redden, to turn pink
ung khau`to improvise, to extemporize#extempore, extemporaneous
ung nhot`tumour
ung pho`to cope with
ung thi`to compete
ung thu`cancer
ung thuan`to agree to
uoc`to wish to estimate, to approximate to guess
uoc chung`to estimate
uoc dinh`to plan
uoc do`approximately
uoc hen`to fix an appointment
uoc luong`to estimate, to measure
uoc mo`dream, wish
uoc mong`to wish, to expect
uoc muon`o wish, would like
uoc vong`aspiration
uom`to try on, to try
uon`stale#spoil#to bend; to curl, to curve
uon eo`to mince, to twist
uon hen`cowardly
uon nan`to shape, to straighten
uon quanh`eandering, tortuous; twisty
uong`to drink
uong nganh`stubborn; seft-willed
uop`to scent to mix with to embalm
uop lanh`to freeze
uot`wet
uot at`wet, damp
uot dam`soaked
up`to upturn, to turn over
up mo`equivocal
ut`smallest, youngest, little
ut it`dumpy
uu ai`affectionate#to favour
uu diem`advantage, strong point
uu phien`sorrow
uu sau`sorrowful
uu tien`prior
uu viet`preeminent
uy ban`committee
uy danh`authority; prestigious fame
uy hiep`to bully, to overwhelm, to tread on the neck of;
uy lao`o solace
uy luc`power
uy mi`mawkish, maudlin
uy nghi`majestic
uy phong`venerably imposing
uy quyen`authority#to authorize, to grant power
uy thac`o vest with the power
uy the`power and influence
uy tin`prestige
uy vien`ember
uych`thudding; thuddingly to paste, to thump
uyen bac`erudite
uyen chuyen`lissom, flexible
uyen tham`profound
va`and#fine#he, him#to collide, to bump#shovel, ladle#to mend;#to slap
va lai`moreover, in adition
va li`uitcase
va ni`anilla
va viu`patchy
vac`night heron#to carve#to carry on shoulder
vac dau`cauldron of oil
vach`to draw, to point out, to outline to expose, to uncover#wattle wall
vach tran`to expose, to uncover
vai`Cloth#itchi#ai Thieu (Thieu litchi) is a bit bigger than a longan. Unlike the skin of Longan which is rather smooth, the skin of litchi is rough with some ripples. The skin is dark red. The pulp of a litchi is transparently white, but is thicker than a longan. Therefore, litchi pulp is juicier than a longan. Litchi seed is also smaller than Longan seed. Thieu litchis are grown in many big orchards in Hung Yen province#jar#shoulder rank part, role#some, several
vai tro`role, part
vam`rivulet mouth (into a river)#to mince
van`board, plank game, set#destiny, fortune#to wear, to put on#over, finished, dispersed#rhyme; verse syllable; sound#to roll#it dung) torment#short, brief#still, yet#ten thousand#to wind to roll#to wring, to twist to turn, to wind#valve#beseech#vein
van bang`diploma
van canh`context
van chuong`literature style
van chuyen`to move to exercise, to take exercise to agitate, to appeal for, to call for
van dan`literary circles
van dap`oral
van de`problem, matter, question
van duc`muddy, turbid
van hanh`to work, to operate, to run
van hoa`culture
van hoc`Literature#Vietnamese literature was developed at an early date. It includes two major components which have developed simultaneously and are profoundly interrelated: Folk literature and written literature. Vietnamese folk literature came into being very early and had a profound effect on the spiritual life of the Viets. The folk literature always praised beauty, humanism, love of godness, and contributed to the formation of a national sense. Legends, fairy tales, humorous stories, folk songs, epics... have a tremendous vitality and have lived on today. Written literature first appeared around the 10th century. It had a leading role and bore the main traits of Vietnamese literature. From the 10th to the 15th century, literary works were written in Han (classical Chinese) and Chu Nom. But since the 16th century, Chu Nom literature became increasingly popular, and held a prime position by the early 18th century. Well-known works written in Chu Nom included Chinh Phu Ngam by female poet Doan Thi Diem, Kieu Story by Nguyen Du and the Chu Nom poems of female poet Ho Xuan Huong. These works were the cream of Vietnamese literature. In the 20's, the country's literature was written in Vietnamese Quoc Ngu (Romanized national language). In that period, the country saw drastic changes in its socio-economic structure and cultural life and began to experience the far-reaching influence of Western culture. Vietnamese literature thereby developed quickly in terms of quantity, genre and form. Prominent in prose were Tat Den by Ngo Tat To, Bi Vo by Nguyen Hong, Buoc Duong Cung and short stories by Nguyen Cong Hoan, short stories by Nam Cao, Giong To and other novels by Vu Trong Phung. Poetry also developed vigorously, culminating in the new poetry movement with a generation of famous authors such as: The Lu, Pham Huy Thong, Xuan Dieu, Luu Trong Lu, Huy Can... Traditionally, Vietnamese literature always featured patriotism, national pride and humanism. It was not by chance that great cultural personalities such as Nguyen Trai, Nguyen Du were also humanists
van hoi`to grill, to question#to recover, to restore
van kien`document
van minh`civilization
van nai`to implore, to insist
van nang`multipurpose, multipower
van phong`office secretariat#style
van phong pham`stationery
van su`everything, all things
van tai`to transport
van tho`marigold#prose and verse#verse
van toc`speed, velocity
van van`et cetera, and so on
van vat`all things, living beings#civilized
van ve`style#polished, refined#to twiddle
van vit`entangled
van xin`to beg, to implore
vang`Yes ; All right#deserted, desolated absent#film, scum#gold#yellow#to cast, to throw to spit out#to echo to resound#to resound faintly
vang anh`oriole
vang khe`very yellow
vang lai`to come and go, to frequent
vang loi`to obey, to comply with
vang lung`far-resounding
vang muoi`pure gold
vang son`resplendent
vang tay`gold and copper alloy
vang ve`quiet deserted
vang y`ure gold
vanh`hoop rim, brim, coil ring, disk
vanh dai`belt
vanh tai`helix
vao`to come in, to go in to set in, to begin to join, to enter#n, into, on#in; to a touchdown
vao hua`to side with
vao khoang`about
vap`to trip, to stumble to flounder, to make (mistakes)
vat`flap plot#terrestrial leech a handful#to wring, to squeeze to throw over on to pull up to cross#thing, object#to wrestle wrestling to slaughter to shake violently#trifling, petty, odd#to pluck, to strip
vat chat`matter
vat lieu`material
vat ly hoc`hysics
vat oc`to rack one's brain
vat the`body, object
vat va`hard, strenuous, in difficulties#laborously, hard
vat vanh`trivial, petty
vau`curl; buck
vay`fin ray, fin-ray#to surround, to encircle, to besiege#scale crust, scab operculum#skirt#smeared#so, thus, that#to borrow#to wave, wag, to waggle
vay canh`side, wing
vay ma`but, however
vay thi`therefore, so
vay va`perfunctory
ve`draw, to paint to contrive#edge, side#look, appearance, sound#mudguard#thigh member influence, position#tick scar (on the eyelid) phial, vial laped, revers#ticket#to return, to come back to belong to to follow#o about, on as for, as to, as regards#to roll
ve binh`guardsman
ve huu`to retire
ve sau`cicada
ve sinh`hygiene
ve tinh`satellite
ve vang`glorious, honourable
ve vay`to waggle
ven`to roll up, to put up, to tuck up
ven toan`complete, accomplishment, perfect
ven ve`perfect
venh`to perk up, to prick up, to raise#warped
venh vao`vainglorious
veo`like a shot, in a flash#to pinch
veo von`melodious
vet`parrot#to dredge to scrape#trace, mark, stain, defect#track, line, streak
vet thuong`wound, injury
vi`gridison, grid, grill grate#taste#wallet,purse#to compare
vi chi`that makes ; the total cost is
vi dai`great
vi do`latitude
vi giac`the sence of taste
vi khuan`bacterium
vi ky`goist, selfish
vi lai`future
vi ngu`predicative
vi nhu`in case, if as for, with regrad to
vi o long`iolon
vi pham`to violate, to break
vi sao`star#why, for what reason
vi ta min`itamin
vi tha`altruistic, forgiveful
vi the`so, therefore
vi tri`position, place
vi tuyen`parallel of latitude
vi vut`whizzing
via`seam
via he`street side
viec`business, affair job, work incident, occurence matter
viec lam`deed, action job, work
viem`to inflame#inflamation
vien`hem, edge#to hem,to edge#institute, court chamber
vien canh`far-sighted, long-sighted, hypermetropic
vien chuc`official
vien co`o reason
vien ly`o argue
vien thong`telecommunication
vien tro`danh tu, dong tu aid, to aid
vieng tham`to visit
viet`to write, to record
viet kieu`Vietnamese resident, overseas Vietnamese
viet vi`off side
vin`to seize, to catch, to hold, to lean on
vinh`gulf, bay#to verse on
vinh cuu`permanent
vinh du`honour
vinh hanh`honoured
vinh quang`glory#glorious
vinh vien`everlasting, eternal
vit`duck, drake#screw#to pull down, to wrest down
vo`cover, bark, shell, sheath, husk, skin, peel, pot, crust tyre#hoof lift net#jar#to crumple up, to crush up to rub#pretend, to sham#to break to clear off#to clap, slap to lap to flap#to gather, to collect to rake in to claim, to assume#to grasp, to catch to catch, to come upon#socks, stockings#wasted#wife
vo be`concubine
vo beo`to feed up, to fatten
vo bien`boundless, unlimited
vo bo`useless
vo can cu`unfounded
vo cau`horse step
vo chu`unowned
vo co`inorganic
vo cuc`infinite
vo danh`unknown
vo dinh`infinite, unidentified, undetermined
vo do`immoderate
vo gia`invaluable
vo hai`innocuous, harmless
vo hieu`ineffective, ineffectual
vo hinh`invisible
vo ich`useless
vo kich`play
vo loai`wicked
vo long`primary, ABC
vo luong tam`ruthless, unconscionable
vo ly`bsurd, unreasonable
vo mu`to burst, to open
vo nghe`art of fighting, kung fu
vo nghia`non-sensical, meaningless amoral
vo no`to go bankrupt, to become bankrupt
vo phep`impolite, rude
vo san`tinh tu, dong tu proletarian
vo sinh`(phu nu) barren inanimate
vo so`innumerable, countless
vo su`unharmed, unhurt
vo tan`endless
vo tay`to clap one's hands, to applaud
vo than`atheistic
vo thua nhan`unowned, derelict, abandoned
vo tinh`callous unintentional
vo toi`innocent
vo tu`impartial, unbiased
vo tu lu`carefree
vo van`foolish, nonsensical, silly
vo vap`to welcome warmly
vo ve`to comfort, to console
vo vi`insipid, colourless
vo vit`to feign, to pretend
vo vo`solitarily, lonely
vo y thuc`unconscious
voc`a double handful#to scoop
voc dang`stature, size, build
voi`elephant#in a hurry, hasty#lime#to reach out, to reach#ith, to, towards from#trunk#spout#tap#stream, fountain
voi va`hastily, hurriedly
voi voi`heliotrope
voi vua`mortar
vom`at vault, arch
vom canh`watch tower
von`capital, bond, fund#originally, formerly#to play with to set off, to bring out
von va`to show great warmth
vong`circle, round, ring revolution hoop#to round#hammock#to sag down#to echo, to resound#to overgrow
vong an`ungrateful
vong gac`watch tower
vong hoa`wreath
vong kieng`bandy
vong linh`death's soul, ghost
vong mac`retina
vong quanh`round-about
vong tuong`to dream wildly of
vong veo`tortuous, twisty
vot`hand net racquet, racket#to pick up to save to pass#to sharpen, to whittle#to spurt out
vu`breast#dance#season, time#swollen
vu bao`rain-storm
vu dai`stage, arena
vu em`nurse maid
vu khong`slander, calumniate
vu khuc`ballet
vu loi`to look for gain, self seeking
vu nu`dancer
vu oan`to accuse falsely
vu qui`ngay vu qui) wedding-day
vu sua`Star apple#pon entering an orchard of star apple trees, visitors can see for themselves hundreds of star apples hanging suspendedly from branches. The round and smooth fruits are of the same size. The shape of the star apple only may as well match the name attached to it let alone its juice as fragrantly sweet, purely white as the milk from the breast. When using the knife to cut the fruit, it is advisable to cut the fruit into two parts before using a spoon to take out the pulp bit by bit until nothing is left. The most appreciated way to enjoy this fruit is to drill a small hole at its top and lift it to the mouth and raise the head backward to suck the flow of the fragrant juice into the mouth continuously as if a baby sucking milk from its mother's breast. Don't forget to squeeze the tough fruit for a while until it becomes tendered so that the juice can mix with the pulp of the fruit to become a sweet and fragrant muddy substance that looks like milk from the breast
vu tru`universe
vu vo`vague
vua`barn, granary#king#mortar#suitable, fitting
vua long`satisfied
vua luc`just at the moment
vua moi`recently
vua tam`within reach of
vuc`chasm, abyss#to raise
vui`bury#merry, joyful, gay
vun`tinh tu, danh tu crushed, trifling#to pile up
vun trong`to cultivate
vun vat`petty, trifling
vung`clumsy#cover, lid flowrish, brandish#firm, steady#pool, puddle#region, area#sesame
vung ben`durable, stable
vung chac`firm, solid
vung vang`to bestir oneself
vung vay`struggle
vuon`(ddo^.ng) gibbon#garden#to rise up
vuon bach thu`zoo
vuon cay`rchard
vuong`catch to be burdened#king#prosperous, thriving#square
vuong vai`to be scattered
vuong van`be attached to
vuong viu`to get involved
vuot`claws#to cross to pass overcome
vuot ve`to fondle, to stroke
vut`threw#to whip, to lash
xa`(d-ong) snake#far, distant, remote#let out#to salute, bow profoundly#village
xa beng`ever, crowbar
xa bong`oap
xa cach`far away from, distant
xa cu`concha
xa giao`savoir vivre, social relations
xa hoa`luxurious, lavish
xa hoi`society
xa hoi chu nghia`socialist
xa hoi hoc`sociology
xa huong`musk
xa kich`fire, shoot
xa la`strange
xa lach`alad
xa lan`arge
xa lanh`keep away from
xa lim`ell
xa lo`hightway
xa luan`editorial
xa nha`eam
xa tac`land, state
xa than`sacrifice one's life
xa thu`riffle man, gunner
xa toi`pardon
xa xam`very far
xa xi`luxurious
xac`corpse#impolite
xac dang`true, exact
xac dinh`to define
xac nhan`confirm
xac thuc`real, true
xac xo`destitute, ragged
xac xuoc`pert
xach`to carry by the handle
xai`to spend the money
xam`grey#oracle
xam chiem`to invade
xam luoc`to invade
xam mat`to pale
xam minh`tattoo
xam nhap`to penetrate, to trespass
xam pham`to violate
xam xit`leaden
xan`to turn up, to roll up, to tuck up
xan lan`splendid, bright
xang`gasoline, petrol#rudely
xanh`blue, green
xanh biec`very blue
xanh la cay`green
xanh lo`blue
xanh xao`very pale
xao`artful#to fry#unreliable
xao dong`agitate
xao lang`to neglect
xao quyet`cunning, artful
xao tron`disorder
xao xac`to rustle, to flutter
xao xuyen`to upset
xap xi`apporoximate, about
xat`rub#to cut, to slice
xau`to thread, to string#ugly, bad, worse
xau ho`to be ashamed
xau net`perverse
xau so`unlucky
xau xa`bad
xau xe`to torment, to tear
xau xi`ugly
xay`to build#to grind, husk
xay dung`build, construct
xay mat`o turn away
xay ra`happen, occur
xay xam`giddy, dizzy
xe`slant, decline#to saw, to split#to tear
xe bo`ox-cart cart
xe buyt`bus
xe cam nhong`ruck
xe co`vehicles
xe cuu thuong`ambulance
xe dap`bicycle
xe dich`to displace, to move
xe dien`tram
xe do`coach
xe du lich`car, automobile
xe gan may`motorbike
xe hoa`train
xe tac xi`axi
xe tang`hearse
xe xich`to inch
xech`slanting
xem`to see, to watch
xem xet`to examine
xen`to cut, to trim#to interpolate, to insert, interfere
xeo`slanting#treat on, trample on
xep`arrange, pile, fold#flat#to go down
xep dat`arrange
xep hang`to line
xep thu tu`o put in order
xet doan`judge
xet hoi`interrogate, question
xet xu`to judge, to decide
xi`leak out, escape#sealing wax polish#slag, cinder
xi ga`cigar
xi lanh` cylinder
xi lip`panties
xi mang`cement
xi nghiep`business, enterprise
xi ro`syrup
xi xao`buzz, whisper
xia`to pick
xich`danh tu, dong tu chain
xich dao`equator
xich du`swing, rocking chair
xich mich`to be in disagreement
xiec`circus
xiem y`dress
xien`slanting, oblique
xieng`chain
xiet`tighten
xieu`slope, slant
xieu long`yield
xieu veo`tottering, inclined
xin`to ask (for), to beg
xin loi`apologize
xine`cinema
xinh`pretty, nice
xinh dep`beautiful
xit`spray
xiu`fall, to be flat#tiny#to be faint
xo`(buon xo) very sad#corner#rush, dash#thread, fibre#to rush into#to thread, to slip#touch
xo bo`gross
xo day`push
xo so`lottery
xo viet`Soviet
xo xac`denuded, bare
xoa`ang#hang#rub#wipe, rub out
xoai`Mango#ango plants are grown in most southern provinces. The most reputed mangoes come from Cao Lanh district in Dong Thap province. When the mangoes are ripening, they need large amounts of bright sunshine. The more sunshine the maturing fruit receives, the stronger its flavour will be and the brighter its skin will look. Mangoes are divided into several kinds, known locally as Xoai Cat, Xoai Tuong, Xoai Voi, Xoai Xiem, Xoai Ngua. The finest mango is Xoai Cat. The fruit has a brighter yellow peel and a rounder shape and weighs as much as 0.5 kilograms. The pulp is sweeter and more fragrant than that of other varieties
xoan`curly#diamond
xoan xit`to stick to
xoay`to turn, to revolve#whirl
xoay quanh`to turn around
xoay xo`contrive
xoc`to lift up#to shake
xoc vac`to work hard
xoc xech`slovenly, untidy
xoe`pread, open#spread, open
xoi`dig#to pour down#to turn up
xoi moi`perforate, be captious
xoi xa`fast and thick
xom`hamlet
xom gieng`neighborhood
xon xao`tumult
xong`exhale, to rush#finish, be complete
xong xuoi`be complete
xop`spongy, soft
xot`sting, smart
xot da`o suffer
xu`coin#country, region#fluff out#to judge
xu hoa`reconcile
xu huong`tendency, inclination
xu ly`dispose, treat, settle
xu ninh`flatter
xu so`country, homeland
xu su`behave
xu the`behave#general trend
xu thoi`opportunism
xu tram`to behead
xu tri`to act, discipline
xu tu`to condemn to death
xu ue`fetid
xua`ancient, old
xua duoi`to drive away
xua kia`formely
xuan`spring
xuan phan`spring equinox
xuan thu`spring and autumn
xuat`to pay out
xuat ban`publish
xuat cang`export
xuat chinh`go to war
xuat chung`outstanding
xuat duong`to go abroad
xuat gia`get married
xuat hanh`to go out
xuat hien`to appear
xuat phat`emit
xuat sac`excellent
xuat than`come from
xuat trinh`to show
xuat xu`origin, source
xuc`shovel, to scoop up
xuc cam`emotion
xuc dau`to oil
xuc dong`to be moved
xuc giac`touch
xuc pham`to hurt
xuc tien`stimulate, to speed up
xuc xich`ausage
xuc xiem`instigate
xue xoa`easy-going
xui`incite#be unlucky
xui bot`oam
xum`gather, cluster
xum hop`ather
xung dang`suitable, worthy
xung danh`say one's name, to intraduce oneself
xung dot`conflict
xung ho`to call
xung khac`be incompatible
xung phong`assault
xung toi`confess one's sin
xung yeu`important
xuoc`to scratch
xuoi`down
xuoi chieu`agreeable
xuoi dong`own stream#own stream
xuoi van`hymed
xuong`boat whaleboat#bone#factory, mill, workshop#go down, get down#originate#spade
xuong cot`bone, skeleton
xuong danh`to call names
xuong rong`cactus
xuong song`spine
xuong suon`rib
xuong xau`bony
xut xui`himper
xuyen`bracelet#pierce, cross, go through
xuyen tac`distort
xuyt`early#nearly
xuyt xoat`early, about#nearly, about
y`he, him#idea#taly#to depend on
y chi`will
y dinh`intention
y hoc`medicine
y khoa`medicine
y kien`view, opinion
y muon`wish, desire
y nghi`idea, thought
y nghia`mean, sense
y nguyen`intact, unchanged
y niem`concept, notion
y phuc`garments, clothes
y si`physician
y ta`nurse
y te`health service
y thuc`consciousness
y tuong`idea, thought
y vi`savoury, meaningful
y vien`hospital
yem`brassiere#to hide
yem dai`bib
yem ho`support
yem the`pessimistic
yem tro`support
yen`(d-ong) swallow ten kilogramme#saddle#quiet, unmoved
yen lang`quiet, calm, silent
yen on`peaceful, safe
yen tiec`banquet, feast
yen tri`convinced
yeng hung`swaggeringly heroic
yet`to post, to placard
yet hau`pharynx
yet kien`to visit
yeu`love, to be in love with#short life, premature#weak, feeble
yeu cau`require, ask
yeu chuong`to like
yeu dau`dear
yeu diem`the essential point
yeu dieu`graceful
yeu duoi`weak, feeble
yeu kieu`charming, graceful
yeu luoc`elementary
yeu ma`ghost
yeu nhan`very important person
yeu sach`to require
yeu thuat`sorcery
yeu tinh`evil, demon
yeu to`element, factor
